---
layout: ../../layouts/Post.astro
title: To Hell with Germany!
subtitle: Chapter 4
---

As Joseph walked up the gangplank of the German steamer SS *Brandenburg*, thoughts and doubts raced through his mind as diverse as the constantly changing directions of the salty, chilly March winds blowing in from the North Sea.  These were sending an icy reception over all who were anxiously waiting to board.  Had he made the right decision?  Or, was he just running away from seemingly impossible situations?  What would America be like?  Would it be as Uncle Vincent had described?  And, exactly what did he expect from Uncle Vincent?  Had he regretted not accepting Uncle Vincent’s proposal sooner?  What would life with Vincent’s family to be like?  Wouldn’t it be nice to be part of a family where there was no strife?  However, other thoughts also came to mind immediately as well.  With whom was he going to be sharing quarters on this voyage?  And, there were things for which to be thankful at the moment.  He had arrived here in Bremen on time.  He had heard of frightening conditions aboard ships like the SS *Brandenburg.*  At least, he was not going to travel in steerage, for Uncle Vincent had arranged a cabin on deck for him.  It was a cabin for eight and he knew none of those with whom he would share it.  Nor did he know a single person of the hundreds who were traveling aboard this ship as she lay docked at her berth in Bremen on this day.

He was now farther from home than he had ever been and alone, completely alone!  He had been alone before, first when once as a little boy and had spent a night in an abandoned castle alone to prove to himself that he was not afraid and secondly, when he was sent off to the village of Radolfzell at 11 years of age.  He had also served his time in the Kaiser’s reserves, and he had set out pursuing his career, first in Langenargen and then in Stuttgart.  Nothing that he might face in America should defeat him.  He knew his strengths.  He knew his endurance.  He knew no limits!  There would be no turning back unless he did so now!  Yet, there was nothing to go back to.  His mother had fled his father, and his father had retaliated by selling everything and fleeing to another country leaving her with nothing.  Joseph had quit his position in Stuttgart, and he had no female entanglements.  He was a free man.  His career in Germany was at an end.

He was cutting all his ties with his fatherland and his friends, apparently without an ounce of remorse, and he may have done the same with a family that would not listen.  What was there to be remorseful about?  A new life lay ahead!  Certainly, a new life that promised a new beginning and a chance to finally succeed, that is, if all that Uncle Vincent had promised and written was true.  Once the ship was underway, it would be too late.  Long ago he had resolved to be brave, to have the strength to meet any challenges that he might encounter.  Yes, he reassured himself, he could survive.  He would have to.  He would prove it.  There would be no turning back, ever!  He had his motto edged in his mind, one that would give him confidence, if needed.   “*Es muß gehen!”* [^1]

Joseph had answered all these questions to his satisfaction many times before.  His mother had not reacted well to the news that her favorite son was leaving Europe, perhaps forever.  All the reasons given her, no matter how logical, had not pleased her or settled her anxiety.  Now she had more reasons for continuing her crying bouts, by feeling sorry for herself and for losing her firstborn son.  What would she do without him nearby?  How it must have broken her heart knowing that the one to whom she had always looked for help was now bent on leaving!  He would be gone for a long, long time, perhaps forever.  What had her son found so fascinating about Vincent?  What had Vincent seen in her son?  Why was he luring her son from her side?  Most importantly, why did her son want to leave?  To whom would she turn for help now?  Why, why was he doing this to her?

With Joseph gone, Maria would depend on Anna, but Anna could never replace him.  Yet, it would be Anna and Anna alone, for there was no one else to whom she could turn.  It never occurred to Maria that Anna had already shouldered the responsibility of caring for her and Ernst, her younger brother.  Did she not realize that it was always Anna who was there and would always be there for her?  Nevertheless, it was Joseph who now broke her heart; however, can a heart so heavily laden with doubts about oneself, a heart weary of a life of sadness, ever recover?  Would she ever see a day of happiness in all of her miserable life?  Joseph had long ago decided that he could not think about her plight.  He had given his consultation many times before, and she had refused to take the steps that he had suggested.  What point was there in continuing to make suggestions that were not being followed?  She had chosen to ignore it all and now she paid the consequences.  He could do no more.  Still, he did not need to worry, for Anna would take care of their mother and brother if only through taking care of herself.  Their mother could offer no objections, for there were no other options.  With great regret, she surrendered herself to Anna’s care.

It was Anna who was the one who had been supporting Maria since they had left Wendelin.  She was quite young, still not 16, and Ernst, her brother, was only 11 when they had fled Volkertshausen.  It was Anna, not Joseph, who had given up school and abandoned her dreams of becoming a teacher.  She had sought work in Tuttlingen, and it was her meager earnings from cleaning houses that provided a roof over their heads.  And, the roof was right over their heads, it being an attic where she had found them all a place to stay.  It was Anna who put food on the table.  It was Anna who knew that she had to make a better appearance if she hoped to find a better position that paid more.  Her talent for sewing now became more important than she could ever have imagined.  In time she did find better employment in a candy shop, but it would be some years before she was hired at a factory that made shoes.  It was Anna who assumed the responsibility for the care of her mother and the care of her younger brother.  It appeared that Joseph did not concern himself about their mother’s life from day to day.  Whether she had enough to eat or whether she worked was blocked from his mind.  She never was able to work for anyone again, but that basic fact did not seem to register with him as he continued to write in future letters as if she were at work earning money.  Perhaps Joseph was in denial as to his family’s real situation.  For now, after all, he had his own career to advance, and that was far more important.

Their mother was physically traumatized beyond help, rendering her unable to work for anyone.  She did not even have a second change of clothes when she arrived in Tuttlingen; Anna knew that even if Joseph did not, but it is impossible to know if Anna

ever wrote Joseph that in so many words.  The end of Maria’s marriage had destroyed any self-respect left.  She spent hours weeping and wailing while Anna was away at long hours of work, something that she would do for the rest of her life.  Joseph had long before decided he had his own career to look after and simply could not be bothered with supporting his mother, despite that he thought that she was the greatest influence in his life.  It was his career that mattered, and since 1912 he had been in Stuttgart, even farther away from Tuttlingen than he was when he lived in Langenargen.  He could only offer what he had always been best at offering: advice.  It was only his advice that mattered to their mother even if often she did not follow it.  A few words of wisdom and suggestions were all that she needed from time to time.  After all, she could still write to her firstborn even as he lived in America.  He could write to her.  She could also write to Uncle Vincent.  She would ask him to look after him, to keep him safe, and to help him.  She resolved to do that!  She would do that on her own.  Joseph would never have to know, at least not until told.

His mother was emotionally not a happy person, and her constant state of depression bothered him, but there was nothing that he could do to ease her pain whether he was there or away.  No amount of reassurances could help relieve the anticipated loss of his leaving, and he had to have known that she would forever bear that pain.  But what could she do?  It was just one more burden that she would have to endure the best she could.  He had grown somewhat indifferent to her constant cries for help.  She had often asked but also more often refused to act on so much of his advice. This time he resolved to ignore her pleas not to leave as much as it might have hurt him to do so.  His mind had been made up.  He was leaving.  She would have to make the best of it.  Those who were disappointed would have to make the best of it, too.  One day Joseph would adopt a favorite expression for such occasions and simply tell others to “lump it.” [^2]

Making the decision to immigrate had not been an easy one for Joseph, nor would it have been for any person knowingly leaving behind family members, many of whom he might be saying farewell to forever.  Joseph knew full well that saying good-bye could be his final look upon the faces of those he was about to render to memory; with one final embrace and one more hug for his mother, eyes quickly looked away as he took his leave of them.  Finally, a last momentary glimpse would have to be remembered in the far reaches of his mind forever.  Anna, Ernst, and his mother had accompanied him down to the train station in Tuttlingen to see him off.  His mother had for so many years seen him off to school in Radolfzell, off to serve his time in the army, or off to work in Langenargen; now she tearfully bid him farewell.  He gave his little brother a final pat on the head.  He had consistently teased him and made him to bear the butt of his many pranks.  He gripped of the shoulder of his only sister, with whom he had grown as close as he dared allow himself and mentally commuted to her the total responsibility to take care of their mother, disregarding the simple fact that she had taken up those reigns herself almost two years prior to his departure.  No one else, not a single friend, was there to see him off: none of his friends he had made in the army or along the shores of Lake Constance, and certainly none from Stuttgart.  He had shared his decision to leave with no one.

It had been only yesterday when Joseph stepped on board the train and hurried through the coach to get to a window where they could each see one another just once more before the train’s whistle would mark the moment of departure.  They all appeared to be cheering as they waved good-bye, and he precipitated as if he were telling them, “Look, see, I’m on board now, safe as can be.   Don’t worry about me.”  Despite the tears of sadness of those left on the platform that morning in Tuttlingen, they had to know that he might never come back.  Nothing hereafter would be the same for him or for those he had left behind.  As the train left the depot, Joseph stood at the opened window in his compartment and waved good-bye.  He leaned out the window and took a final glace down the track to confirm that the depot was now well out of sight and further attempts to steal one more glimpse was totally useless.  He closed the window and sat for a few moments as reality hit him hard.  His eyes finally filled with tears, tears that he had never dared to allow himself to be shed in anyone’s presence.  To do so would have made the farewell far worse and shown his weakness.  He could not allow himself to do that.  He was not the sort to dwell long on such things, and he soon had to pay close attention as the train gathered speed for he would have to switch trains in Freiburg in less than an hour.  He glanced at his pocket watch to confirm the times against his ticket.

Joseph made the change to a larger, faster express in Freiburg, and then another in Stuttgart, catching the direct *Schnell Zug* (express) to Bremen.  He stared out his window as the streets of Stuttgart began to flash by.  He had gotten to know Stuttgart somewhat, but it was so unlike his years in Langenargen on Lake Constance, where he had spent hours talking with friends in the coffee shops and sailing on the deep, quiet, glacial waters of Lake Constance that created a feeling as if time stood still.  He had felt lost in Stuttgart, and it had not been a good decision to accept the position offered there.  It was not as intimate as Langenargen had been.  It was bigger, and it was more difficult to make friends.  People did not linger in the cafes as they had done in Langenargen.  They seemed more in a hurry to get home, to leave work, and as if they had no time for idle talk.  It had not produced the results that he had hoped for.  In his last year there, he had regretted his move there more than ever.  Hirsch and Lichter had not advanced his career.  Perhaps working for Uncle Vincent’s company would be different.

For now, Joseph’s thoughts wandered to such things as whether his two trunks that he had checked through to Bremen were on board the train.  Later, lighting up a cigarette in the confinement of his accommodations for the overnight trip to the great port city of Bremen where he would board the German liner, SS *Brandenburg*, he finally had a chance to reflect on the events of the past few days.  He took time to marvel at what a wonderful network of rail service Germany had built.  Surely, it was one of the finest in the world!  Every now and then the engine ushered forth a series of short, high-pitched whistles as it crossed each of the many roads that intersected its path.  He saw the new automobiles that waited at the crossings and reflected on the technical advancements Germany had made in a seemingly endless race into the future, but despite such achievements, those of a personal nature were not healed by mechanical advancements.  The overnight train would put him in Brenham with enough time to board the ship directly from the main downtown station.  He had everything he needed to clear customs: his passport, his list of items he needed to declare, and the ticket that Uncle Vincent had sent for his passage.  It was a good thing that Uncle Vincent had done so far because in all his years since completing his schooling, he had been unable to save much money.[^3]

It had been almost four years since Joseph had seen his “Uncle Vincent.”  Vincent had described the United States and especially Texas in such glowing terms, that it had been extremely difficult for Joseph to turn down Uncle Vincent’s first proposals.  What his uncle had seen in him that prompted him to invite Joseph to come to Texas, he was not exactly sure.  Had Uncle Vincent seen a potential for him to succeed?  Had he seen how difficult and miserable Wendelin had made everyone’s life around him? Had he detected that Wendelin had no intentions of allowing Joseph to join him in his business?  Had Joseph’s questions revealed too much of himself to Vincent?  Or, did Vincent think that Joseph needed rescuing from his family?  How much had Wendelin revealed of his feud with his son to Vincent?  Did Joseph have enough educational background to work for him?  Did Vincent see in him that same determination that he had once himself had as a young lad, one of working hard and making something of oneself?  Was that element missing among Vincent’s own sons?  Would Joseph have taken this step had Uncle Vincent not come to visit?  Why now?  Why Texas of all the American states?  Why not New York?  Whatever thoughts were racing through Joseph’s mind as he ascended the boarding ramp, it was now too late.  There was just too much to comprehend at this time.  From this point, Joseph decided, it was all about the future, his future.

Joseph had brought what little personal things that he had accumulated in Langenargen and Stuttgart to Tuttlingen in the weeks before his departure.  He had bunked in the attic his sister had rented for his mother and Ernst since 1912.  He had been busy making lists and thinking of what he needed in Texas.  Being pestered by his little 13-year-old brother did not help his demeanor that week, but then the two had never been close, and Ernst saw no need to forgive and forget the years of taunting that Joseph had inflicted upon him.  Ernst was glad he was leaving.  He kept as far away as he could from his brother this last week even when as he came to realize that Joseph might never return.  If he did, it did not make much difference, for Joseph’s mind was on other, more important things, and Joseph had no time or intentions to share his thoughts with Ernst.  After all, what kind of conversation could a 13 year-old carry on with him?

From what Uncle Vincent had told Joseph of the climate in Texas, he felt he had enough warm clothes, but what if the weather was really hot? How was he expected to dress for work at Vincent’s mills?  He had always dressed well for work, often in the latest fashion sweeping Europe.  He was, of course, thinking office work.  Upon arrival in Texas, he found that Vincent’s sons had other ideas.  What could they do with a man who spoke no English?  There were so many questions and yet so little time to gather everything he might need.  He would simply make do with what he had.  He had purchased a matching set of steamer trunks in Stuttgart.  One trunk was larger than the other, but they were a perfect set and quite durable.  Joseph thought they were very modern looking, as they should be for any modern-day traveler whether on ships or trains.  When he moved from Stuttgart, he packed what possessions he had accumulated since securing employment.  Now he set out to decide what needed to be packed and what he should leave behind.  First, he packed his books, for they were his most important possessions.  He would need them, but none were in English and for a while they might be all that he would have to read.  At that time he was unaware of the large numbers of Germans who had settled in Texas.  Then he packed things that meant the most to him.  There weren’t many.  No gold pocket watch from a grandfather, just the one he had purchased himself.  Certainly he wanted nothing of a remembrance from Wendelin and took nothing from Maria and Anna as Anna had had little chance to gather more than a few of their personal belongings before Wendelin locked them out of the only home Anna and Ernst had known.  At the last minute he decided to take his trusted copper compass that he had carried since he was a little boy.  He might just need it to find his way around Texas.  Space was limited and time was short.  He decided quickly and would have to make the best without things should he have forgotten anything.

From his mother he had long ago been given a matching place setting from the set that had been in the hope chest she had assembled as a girl growing up on the Buhlhof.  A place setting for one consisted of one knife, one fork, and one spoon, made of Sollingen [^4] steel with black wooden inset handles.  He had carried these with him since going off to school in Radolfzell.  These he treasured more than anything else he had ever owned.  He had vowed to use them at each and every meal for the rest of his life as a remembrance of her as something tangible from the home in Volkertshausen he would never visit again.

Mostly, however, he began to distribute things, especially items for which he felt he had no more use.  Consequently, he gave to his sister the brass tea kettle, complete with a stand and a small alcohol burner that he had used to brew his tea and heat water since being away at school.  He might need it in Texas, but he simply had no room.  He also gave her his small chess set and other sundry things.  There were some things for his little brother, too.  Then he sorted through his clothes and packed only what he might wear: shirts and collars, (those stiff kinds that required starching and ironing), collar buttons, a set of gold cuff links, tie clasp, garters for his socks, socks, shoes, underwear, pants, and suspenders; he included a set of woolen long handles, his bathing suit that he had purchased for swimming in the waters of Lake Constance, and his good woolen pants and coat.  He wore a newsboy, “Ivy type,” woolen cap to keep his head warm, for he had read that the North Atlantic could be quite cold in March.  Last, he added his black, woolen, frock coat with split-tails, his pop-up top silk hat, and a woolen scarf.  Of course, he needed his shaving mug, razor, and razor strap.  He would keep his leather gloves out and wear them, if needed, aboard ship.

All in all, he hadn’t accumulated all that much in his first twenty-five years.  Books, it was mostly books that seemed to fill his trunks, plus, of course, writing paper, pens, ink, and extra pen points.  He packed no photographs; there was not a single one of his mother or his sister or his little brother to take along.  Even the family photograph-postcard, so recently taken in front of the *Gastehaus zum Löwen* that included his father, failed to be included in his collection of postcards.  Only his collection of postcards, many still unsent and collected from places he had visited, was packed.  He had purchased them as remembrances of his travels in the Black Forest and in parts of Switzerland and Austria.  Some he had received from friends that he had made in the army and at work in Langenargen, but not a single postcard from friends during his time in Stuttgart was included.  Yet, the collection included those from Maria Bayer.  As he lowered and locked the lids of his trunks, he felt that he had selected all that he needed to survive in America.  He was ready for whatever may lay ahead.

img001

img002

img003

img004

img005

img006

img007

img008 [^5]

**This kettle was used by Joseph in Langenargen and Stuttgart.   He gave it to his sister, Anna, upon immigrating in 1914.**

Joseph had not been able to save much during his brief employment.  There were clothes to buy and rent to pay the company, for he had rented a room from Bass and Keller, money to spend for food, wines and beer, and dances to attend.  After all, appearances  had  mattered,  even  in  small  towns  such  as  Langenargen  and  even  more  so  in  Stuttgart!   He  was  trying  to  look fashionable and well-dressed, a required attribute in those days in Germany, if one were ambitious and working to get ahead.  Then he didn’t need much extra money, for Joseph was quite frugal with his living expenses. Vincent had promised him a job and had sent him the money to buy a ticket for his journey and even a little money to tide him over until he arrived in Texas.  It was not a First Class ticket as Vincent had traveled when he steamed to Germany in 1910, but he did get Joseph a room on the top deck, not below deck in steerage.  Already Joseph felt entitled among all the other passengers.

Joseph worried about what kind of employment Vincent had in mind for him at his mills.  He worried also of proving himself to his uncle!  He needed to show his uncle that he had judged him correctly, that he was not like Wendelin!  He could learn everything about Vincent’s business.  Perhaps he could help with keeping books, for Joseph had done that for Bass & Keller in Langenargen and at Hirsch & Lichter in Stuttgart, but Vincent had not asked for a resume.    Joseph was swept with emotion, a feeling that he seldom permitted himself.  Here was his opportunity, a chance for a better life in America.  Then, as if hit by lightning, he began to realize that of all the languages he had studied, English had not been among them since abandoning his agricultural curriculum.  What had he been thinking?  Why had he never prepared himself for the possibility of immigrating before?  He had no reservations against learning. It would be just another hurdle to overcome and overcome it he would.   He felt confident that he could learn English quickly, for he had always done well in school, and after some moments of anxiety, he relaxed, having decided he could master the language in weeks.

Joseph had said his good-byes to his friends and colleagues in Langenargen long before moving to Stuttgart and had journeyed only to Tuttlingen to say good-by to his mother, Anna, and Ernst.  The staff at Hirsch & Lichter might have hated to see him leave but wished him well and great success.  He had been a trusted and valuable employee in the short time he was there.  If he had made any friends while living and working in Stuttgart, there is no way of knowing, for there were no clues found among his possessions.  It had not been his mother’s habit of saving those letters he had written from Langenargen and Stuttgart.  Only after his immigration to Texas had she done that.  He had also not kept up an active and constant level of correspondence with a number of army buddies and colleagues after leaving Langenargen in 1912.  He had enjoyed their outings: walking and hiking in the forests and mountains and sailing on the quiet waters of Lake Constance.  While he had packed the earlier postcards, something went wrong, for few postcards were exchanged after his move to Stuttgart.  Whatever the reason, he now severed all ties with those friends and especially with the one who may have supposedly broken his heart.  Perhaps he was punishing all those who he felt had taken her side.  It may have been characteristic of him for years, but he clearly began to distance himself from those who seemed to ignore his advice or had crossed him.  On the other hand, this severance from those with whom he served while in the Bavarian reserves may have been a mistake he regretted, especially if it was true that all his friends from Radolfzell and Volkertshausen had fallen in the Great War.  Refusing to write or correspond cost him a last chance to share thoughts with them.

As for Wendelin, whether Joseph stayed or immigrated didn’t make any difference to him, and it was doubtful that anyone cared to tell his father that he was leaving.  They had settled their scores with one another long before. Wendelin was never going to regain Joseph’s trust and very likely did not care.  Joseph certainly wasn’t going to change his opinion of Wendelin.  He did not wish to see him or to say good-bye.  As far as Joseph was concerned, Wendelin was dead.  Wendelin’s selling of the house, inn, and farm out from under his mother was an act that Joseph could never forgive.  Wendelin’s sisters had even helped bar Anna from collecting much from her own home; such was the depth of Wendelin’s wrath.  Nothing Maria had acquired in all those years of helping rear his children and managing the Gasthaus zum Löwen was made available to her as Wendelin sold the properties.  Of course, to have done so might have alerted Maria and Anna as to what Wendelin was planning and just perhaps it might have been enough time to have stopped him.  We will simply just never know.

All those with whom Joseph had shared games and hours of play from his childhood and his comrades in arms who had participated with him in the pranks he had pulled received no farewell from him either.  Nor did he receive any farewell messages from those who had served with him in the local militia reserves.  Nor did he speak with his favorite teachers, who he knew had known of his intelligence and potential for succeeding anywhere, especially in America.  Nor was he able to see his priest and take confession one last time.  Of course, there were no aunts on his father’s side that he cared to see.  They had turned against Maria just as his father had done.  Surely one day, he would return, having lived a life well-spent, to make them all proud of the boy who had been reared amongst them, just as his Uncle Vincent had done.  Perhaps he would restore some reputation to his family. If he had planned intentionally to avoid keeping in contact with those with whom he had been reared, he would find many of his intended consequences in vain, for many of his comrades would not survive the Great War that was soon to follow, and he may have regretted his actions.

Joseph was at last all set to go.  The decision to leave had not been an easy one.  He had taken months to think it over.  When Vincent first proposed to help nearly four years earlier, Joseph should not have given him such a cool response, although he apparently had not exactly closed the door to Vincent’s offer.  Joseph wanted to be certain of all his options.  There were just too many things opening up for him at the moment when Vincent was in Germany, and he thought definitely that his future lay in Europe.  Immigration did not seem much of an option when he had a good position and seemingly was settling in for a good life on Lake Constance.  He was through with his schooling, he had a job at a good company, and he had made friends outside his village.  His many years of study were finally at an end, or so he thought.  There seemed to be opportunity for advancement not only at Bass & Keller, but also at other places.  There was opportunity also for making lifelong friends.  Plus, there also had been a chance for romance.  When the romance failed, the offer from Vincent may have seemed irresistible.  By 1914 things were not working out the way he had intended, even after a move to new employment in Stuttgart.  Slowly at first, then with a more determined mind, he arrived at a new resolution.

The first step toward immigrating had been to fulfill his pledges. He had completed his requirement in the Kaiser’s army before moving to Stuttgart, but the German Army was ordering up its reserves for training more and more frequently now.  He repaid whatever moneys he may have owed.  Then, he began to announce his intentions and gave his resignation at Hirsch & Lichter.  There, he had risen to a somewhat important position as bookkeeper.  Now, after a promising association, he announced he was terminating his position with them.

The second step was to make an application for a passport and have a photograph taken.  His photograph shows that he appears dressed in his finest clothes, definitely suitable for a young gentleman advancing a career.  He had grown a Van Dyke and purchased a silk pop-up top hat to wear with his formal split-tailed woolen coat as the mode of the times demanded for more formal occasions.  He cut a dashing figure and had learned to ballroom dance to perfection.  His hearing was perfectly attuned to the rhythm of the music, and as he squirreled away the hours at area dances, he had made lasting impressions on some ladies, but perhaps not with the one that he wanted.

Now, as he slowly continued to ascent the gangplank, he thought about other incidental things, railroads perhaps, or the climate in Texas.  Was he prepared to live in a climate that he had noticed by scanning through his atlas, lay on the same latitude as Egypt?  Perhaps he might not need such heavy clothing.  And, what about Indians?  Uncle Vincent had written of troubles with Mexico.  Was there a chance that he was moving into a war zone?  Would Mexico reclaim Texas?  If so, his Spanish would come in handy.

Who Maria Bayer was will never be known and to what extent Joseph and Maria knew one another or to the extent of their letter writing to one another, only a few of her postcards remain, those saved by Joseph and perhaps even treasured.  He carried them with him now. They were his reminders of some good times in Germany.  Although he was never seen reminiscing through them, the postcards remained on the top shelf of the Kleiderschrank [^6] that stood in his bedroom until the day he died.  It may well be that there was not a serious romance at all; yet, why the comments in a letter to Anna some decades later, reminiscing about a lost Easter weekend not spent with relatives, but with someone special?

Joseph’s train arrived in Bremen on time, for German railroads as early as 1900 were noted for being punctual.  He had caught enough hours of sleep on the overnight journey to awaken early prior to reaching the Hauptbahnhof,[^7] and now he had ample time to look around the city before boarding the stately steamer the SS *Brandenburg* 8 that would take him away from everything he knew of the world.  The main train station was located in the heart of Bremen, one of Germany’s leading industrial cities, which was already bustling at this hour with activity as all large cities do when awaking from a night’s sleep.  Bremen was also a major seaport for commerce, including major ship lines for other ports of the world.  His two steamer trunks he had consigned directly to the ship and getting to the docks was only a short distance away.  Each step along the way brought him closer to severing his ties with the only country he had ever really known.  It was still not too late to turn back.  However, Joseph was determined to proceed, and he gave thoughts of staying little opportunity to fester as he pressed ahead.

img009 [^9]

**The SS Brandenburg**

In a matter of minutes the carriage pulled alongside one of the gates for the SS *Brandenburg,* and as Joseph opened the door to the carriage, the sounds of the relentless waves lapping against the peer posts of the docks seemingly were counting the seconds until his ship departed.   Overhead, the screeching of the gulls, intermingled with ship horns of an infinite number, emanated from across the harbor.  The air was filled with sounds he had never heard before, not even on the shores of Lake Constance.  The salt laden air filled his nostrils and caught dissipating whips of exhaust from a dozen steamers and coal-fired ships prying the port waters of Bremenhaven.  It was one of Germany’s busiest ports.  The SS *Brandenburg,* moored at its portside dock, was not an impressive ship; it was not one of the classes of the great ships then prowling the Atlantic.  This size was meant to haul cargo, a cargo of humanity-immigrants laden with baggage and crying children.  Whole families were on board seeking a better life in America.  Of course, Joseph considered himself an immigrant of a different type.  He had an assignment and certainly did not place himself on the level of those travelling in steerage.

The  ship’s  single  ramp  was  bustling  with  porters  and  deckhands  scurrying  on  and  off  the  ship;  men  shouted  instructions  to dockworkers, seemingly all busy, but in actuality trying to avoid bumping one another while going up and down the narrow ramps.  Last minute supplies were shuffled aboard with great speed as if there seemed to be some urgency to get the ship underway at its scheduled departure time.  As most trans-Atlantic ships were scheduled, she was posted to heave anchor at noon on the 7th of March.

A large number of people had been granted permission to board when Joseph arrived at the ship’s berth.  Uniformed employees shouted instructions here and there to the gathering crowd.  After each announcement, shifts in the lines seemingly ricocheted slowly outwards to the ends of each line.  Often others inquired of those ahead as to what had been said.  Most of the faces of those waiting had a solemn, forlorn expression as if reality were sinking in on every one of them that this was the most momentous undertaking of their lives.  Perhaps like Joseph, this was the most momentous undertaking each had ever experienced. And, it was. As the lines edged closer to the main gates, the crowd fell ever more silent; some spoke now only in whispers as children were hushed by their parents.  So solemn had it become that the shuffling of feet now became the most noticeable sounds emanating from the crowded gangplanks.  This should have been an hour of great joy.  Everyone looking for opportunity and hope in America was about to experience it.  Instead, their faces were flushed with an anxiety, and their vacant stares cast a somber reality that they might, like Joseph, never see their loved ones again.

At last Joseph’s name was called, and with the help of a steward, he presented his passport and ticket to the gatekeeper.  He surrendered his trunks to the ship’s porters and proceeded through a number of official-looking young officers of the ship until he was finally told he could board.  Walking up the gangplank, he stopped halfway and turned to look at the docks crowded with immigrants awaiting their chance to board in steerage.  Surrounding them were the streets clogged with autos whose constant horns added excitement for the moment to the early morning chill and carriages that seemed not to notice the hundreds of their nation who, having grown desperate at conditions there, were fleeing their shores.  Joseph continued up the ramp and stepped on deck where he was greeted by another ship’s officer and directed along the top deck to the location of his room.  He was fortunate; most that  followed  would  be  directed  down  dark  flights  of  interior  stairwells,  deep  into  the  bowls  of  the  ship  where  their  basic accommodations awaited them.  Uncle Vincent had secured a very nice room on the main outside deck that could accommodate up to ten travelers.  He would have a room with a window and fresh air!  Joseph would room with only 8 other men, all single and traveling alone.  Many, just like him, were seeking a new life in America.

Joseph would later write that there were over a 1,000 on board.  Although rooming with others, he and virtually all those traveling in "steerage" (3rd class) were immigrants. The price they paid was about $50.00 each for the one way voyage.  Vincent had paid Joseph’s traveling expenses and had sent some extra money just in case he did not have enough to make his journey a comfortable one.  Joseph was never one for extravagant spending, and traveling in 1914 could still be hazardous to one’s health despite any precaution taken.  Arriving live at one’s destination was not necessarily assured.  Some years there was about a ten percent mortality rate because of the unsanitary and overcrowded conditions on board these types of liners.[^10]  Of all the major liners transporting immigrants to America, the German lines were cleaner and safer than all others.  The North German Lloyd, from Bremen in the year before, had logged 16,268 people in first class, 28,311 in second class, and 131,081 in steerage to Ellis Island, New

York, in 126 trips across the Atlantic, for example. Not until 1920 were strict quotas established requiring ships to have safer facilities with less crowding.[^11]   Joseph, however, did not complain about the accommodations and never mentioned them later in his after- dinner tales.  He and his comrades apparently had an uneventful voyage that was, according to Joseph, mostly one of boredom broken by some spontaneous carousing.  Joseph was blessed that he was not in steerage because

img010 [^12]

**A Passenger List for SS Brandenburg in 1911**

A voyage such as this might last eight days or more in unspeakable conditions.  Life in steamship steerage was necessarily exceedingly close.  Just a year before Joseph’s immigration, an author, Edward Marshall, had published that traveling  in steerage did great harm to the individual, for it meant that potentially good material for citizenship in the United States, even among the more mature, could very well suffer the shattering of ideals that may have existed prior to embarking on an immigration; it could mean that young men, such as Joseph, on the way to the United States, might come to believe that before they landed that in America, the uncouth, the vulgar, and the obscene found among passengers were the norm for America.[^13]  Such concerns about passengers led to reforms, but it is doubtful that many were harmed by the experience as described by Marshall.

As it was apparently customary for some passengers aboard ships, the roommates in Joseph’s cabin were invited out on deck for a souvenir photograph. Vincent had sat for a photograph on his journey to Germany; now it was Joseph’s turn to sit for posterity.  At 25, he appeared well-dressed; he sported skintight gloves and a heavy, monogrammed coat.  They were posing for this ship photograph on a very wintry overcast day in the North Atlantic.  He would later refer to the other eight Germans on board in a letter home to his mother, but none would follow the other’s successes or failures in America.  Once these four were processed at Galveston, they scattered to live out their lives in America.[^14]  Once introductions were made, there were only conversations, meals, drink, and perhaps card games to while away the days it would take the SS *Brandenburg* to make its way across the North Atlantic into the warmer waters off Florida before heading on into the great Gulf of Mexico, once only a body of water noted in his atlas.  Somewhere on westward from New Orleans lay one of the most unimpressive seaports in America. However, since the American Civil War and especially since the hurricane of 1900,[^15] Galveston had made an astounding recovery, and its port was one of the busiest in the Gulf.

Joseph and his fellow travelers enjoyed a rather comfortable journey.  The SS *Brandenburg* had been at sea for only eight days when she rounded the tip of Florida.  She had made good time in crossing the Atlantic during a March winter.  Here Joseph caught his first brief sight of America.  She also sailed on past New Orleans and other great ports along the Gulf.  Galveston, its final destination, was finally within sight.  The excitement of anticipating life in America now caused him some anxiety.  Would he be able

to continue the debates he had enjoyed with Vincent?  What would it be like to be a part of a real cohesive family?  What tasks would he be given?  Would Vincent fulfill his promises?  The preparations for arrival soon took precedent as the ship drew closer to Galveston, and the captain issued instructions to all passengers on his vessel.

img011 [^16]

**On board the SS Brandenburg March 1914.  Joseph, center right, sits             among other German immigrants to Galveston on the front port side of the ship.**

Joseph was tired of the salt laden air that had grown increasingly warmer since entering the Gulf of Mexico, even in this early March.  Joseph felt the humidity at sea level as if it were glued to his face and hair.  The captain announced their expected docking times and issued instructions to passengers regarding American customs procedures with an authority not seen by most passengers on the high seas.  The SS *Brandenburg* docked at a newly created port to unload its passengers of immigrants.  Joseph was now only a number, one among over a thousand preparing to disembark in this humid, damp, unimposing seaport, expecting and hoping that America would be all that they had envisioned.  This morning, another hush fell upon this ship’s passengers, and the face of fear was clearly evident in the eyes of all.

The United States had built a new facility for accepting the great influx of immigrants landing on its shores, especially since the beginning of the 20th century; it was a massive migration that seemingly had no end.  The natural isolation of Ellis Island that had been so well-utilized to handling the millions arriving in New York had prompted officials to create a similar facility in Galveston.  So many immigrants entered the country here that it was often called the Ellis Island of the South.[^17]  In 1913, just off Pelican Island, the government dredged the bay until it had created an artificial island of sorts that was accessed by a narrow strip of land. Here it was possible to unload all immigrants without fear of their escaping customs and where passengers could be quarantined, if necessary. It was actually quite a large peninsular consisting of many large structures, but with little access to the transportation to the interior.[^18]

img012 [^19]

**The newly constructed port of entry at Galveston, Texas  for all immigrants beginning in 1913.**

March 15, 1914 was a morning that saw mist slowly drifting skyward as if the warm waters of the Gulf of Mexico were steaming.  Another late winter norther had just swept down from the Texas Panhandle; this time a cold arctic blast left parts of Houston under a heavy coating of ice, something not that unusual at this time of the year.  Joseph’s warm woolen coat had come in quite handy all these last ten days, and now he needed it more than ever as he experienced the final remnants of his first blue norther, one with some sting left as it penetrated this deeply into Texas.  The crisp, chilly air made the squawking of the seagulls and pelicans all that more clearer to his ears, and it appeared to many that they were hearing sounds that were coming from far away.  The mighty SS *Brandenburg* was towed to its mooring by two simple tugs and now was obligated to honor the laws of the United States in dislodging its passengers.

Galveston Bay was not a pretty sight; nor was the coast for that matter.  The skies in winter were mostly grey and overcast at that time of year.  The chilly winds that followed the cold front had swept the skies of clouds during the night, and the fresh day has a chilly sting that caused many now gathering on top deck to shiver and button the topmost buttons on their coats.  Most passengers, having come from northern countries of Europe, were well-prepared with winter clothing.  Joseph among them was not experiencing the cold. Looking ahead toward the place where the ship was being towed, however, was not a picture of spectacular scenic proportions.  The man-made island was dredged from the bottom of Galveston Bay.  Millions of oyster shells made its foundation.  What an unglamorous welcome it was to a world that had been described with such beauty by Vincent!  It was not something to remember, and the doubts about so many uncertain and unanswered questions caused more concern than comfort as the gangplanks were finally raised to meet the crusty decks of the ship, and the passengers were allowed to disembark, at last setting foot on their promised land, if albeit at the moment, it was only a man-made island of broken grayish oyster shells dredged from the bay.

Soon a steady stream of passengers were snaking from the belly of the liner and proceeding to one of the buildings as being directed. Those few with United States passports were directed to a gate where they quickly passed through customs.  All others, the vast majority of this ship’s passengers, were all directed now to form several lines and given a number.  Names no longer mattered, only numbers.  Things actually moved quickly as groups were sent to other lines inside the first building. Joseph was directed to a uniformed officer.  He handed the officer his passport and nodded several times to questions asked of him; then he was directed to recover his baggage and take it to customs.

Joseph had no trouble getting through customs or escaping quarantine.  His papers were all in order; especially helpful was the letter from Vincent showing that he was going to be employed.  Government officials frowned on immigrants that had no place to go.  A series of doctors worked each line asking questions about each immigrant’s health.  Some men were asked to remove their shirts.  Others, including the women, were directed into rooms for an examination. Those who were coughing or too ill to stand caught the watchful eyes of officers, and they were led off into other rooms, often separating parents from children and causing fear and concern.

So, unable to speak a word of English, Joseph had just managed to enter the United States of America.  Within minutes Joseph was shown the way to the Union Station where a new Santa Fe Depot was under construction.  When finished, it would encompass an eight-story building that dwarfed all other buildings on the Strand [^20] by 1915.  Joseph was surprised, however, to find hundreds of soldiers marching into town.  Later he would learn that these were part of a training exercise by the U. S. Army.  Many had marched from another camp located in Texas City, a city across the bay from Galveston. [^21]  The presence of so many soldiers surprised Joseph, for he thought he had just left a country obsessed with the military.  Was America the same?  Because of unstable conditions in Mexico, President William H. Taft had ordered three transports and two brigades to Galveston in early 1913.  It was the 5th Brigade, Joseph would eventually be told, which comprised of some 4,000 men and the Army transport ships.  The UST *McLellan, Summer, and Kilpatrick* were all docked as the SS *Brandenburg* slid into her berth. [^22]

At last Joseph reached the main deport, and there he checked his trunks and other baggage to Hico, Texas.  He presented his one-way ticket in first class that Uncle Vincent had also provided and noted from the station railroad clock that he had some hours  before  departure.  The  ordeal  of clearing  customs had  been  an experience,  but  now  Joseph  realized  that  he  had  really outsmarted himself all these years by learning French, Italian, and Spanish.  Why had he not learned English?  He decided that he would have to do so at once.  Meanwhile, with some time on his hands, he took a quick look at The Strand and the bustling street that lay directly eastward from the railroad station.  The Strand was packed with carriages, wagons, and some new cars this morning, but mostly it was packed with people on foot and presented a city as busy as any port city in Germany.  Joseph had seen the many docks along the channel where wharf after wharf  were packed with bales of cotton, freshly baled since the previous fall and now awaiting export to ports of call the world over.  It was a sight that Joseph had never seen before.  Dockworkers were busy loading and unloading steamers and square riggers moored alongside one another.  The docks were teeming with dockhands.  The United States seemed to be as busy as the port of Bremen had been.  Everyone appeared to be working, but the number of Negros seen everywhere was a sight that startled him.  They were not something to which he had been accustomed.

The Strand was one of the premier city streets in the United States.  Each side was lined with two or more story brick buildings, each with beautifully laced ironwork adorning their porches.   This was truly an American city.  In many ways it looked a lot like the postcards he had seen of New Orleans.  The red brick streets were classic American.   Export houses lined both sides of the Strand as far as Joseph could see.  This was the heart of the Texas commerce, and Joseph could see why Galveston was such an important financial center for American business.  There was still some visible damage from the great 1900 hurricane that had killed so many on this island just 14 years before.  The storm had leveled the city, but in just 12 years much had been repaired.  Most remarkably was the dredging still going on in an attempt to raise the entire city by a dozen feet or more.

img013 [^23]

**Cotton on the Wharfs of Galveston – 1909**

Not knowing the language of the country in which one wished to live was not good.  Joseph was about to learn a lesson that he would never forget, albeit he related it many times thereafter even if it revealed him to be the brunt of the joke.  Being hungry, he decided to get breakfast at a busy café he had found along the Strand.  Many of his fellow passengers seemed to have done the same.  He took a seat at a table and was quickly waited on by a young woman who, as she was pouring him coffee, asked him if he wanted eggs. “Nein, danke,” [^24] he replied. She turned around and went back to the kitchen.  Joseph might have thought it strange, but to his surprise she returned with nine fried eggs.  There was nothing he could do, so he ate them all.  He had learned a valuable lesson, one that he would never forget, and the story became one of his favorite to repeat at his Sunday after-dinner tales.

His first day in America had gone fairly well up to now save for breakfast.  His train was scheduled to leave at 4:30 p.m. to Houston.  This was the evening special.  By 4:00 he was safely on board.   He took a window seat in the first class passenger car, for he wanted to see what the countryside looked like.  To his great disappointment there was not much to see, except flat open plains with pools of water standing along the track.  The scenery was not pretty, and nothing changed as he crossed the long railroad bridge that linked Galveston to the mainland and continued on to Houston.  He immediately also began to notice striking differences.  The American countryside was not nearly as cleanly kept as he was accustomed to seeing in Germany.  Perhaps he would just enjoy the ride.  In Houston he switched trains.  He had checked his baggage on to Hico in Galveston.  The train heading to Waco departed the Houston depot at 10:00 p.m.  That train arrived in Waco around 5:00 a.m.  From there he made another change to a final leg to Hico.  Fortunately, there was a morning special that left Waco for points west at 6:00 a.m.  He finally arrived in Hico at 9:30 on the morning of the 16th.  It would be great to finally see Uncle Vincent again.

Joseph had been unable to see much of the countryside until aboard the last leg of his journey to Hico.  Dawn in winter was still quite late, but as dawn broke the Central Texas skies, he was able to see the changes that had occurred along the route from Galveston.  Much of the route now was through a forest of post oaks and brown, muddy streams, broken occasionally by farmsteads that were being readied for planting cotton and grains.  The black earth found along the Brazos River was famous for its cotton yields he would learn.  So much space, marveled Joseph, so unlike the farming practices in Germany where every available inch was cultivated.   Despite the chill that the recent norther had left in the air, wildflowers could be seen beginning to bloom along the railroad right-of-way.  They produced patches of yellow and red here and there, but now mostly patches of blue. He had never seen such a mass of blue-colored flowers. Now more and more stands of thick oak were appearing with much more underbrush and briars.  Joseph observed that in Texas, most farmers apparently did not clean their fence rows, and he thought it presented an untidy image.  Now, very near to Hico, appeared more groups of impeding cacti, whose patches presented a hostile environment to Joseph.  He hadn’t expected that.  Perhaps America was not as prosperous or as civilized as Vincent had claimed.

At long last he arrived in Hico, but unaccustomed to how it was pronounced, he almost missed getting off.  Thus a second lesson for the need for quickly learning English was learned, and another tale was born that he enjoyed recalling later, even if, as earlier, the joke was on him.  He was expecting something sounding like “Hee-ko,” as that is how Hico would be pronounced in German.  What he heard was “Hike-co” as only conductors can meet out.  Only at the last minute, upon seeing the sign of the station at the depot did he realize that this was his stop.  He quickly gathered his things to get off the train, much to the amusement of some of his fellow travelers who could clearly understand what had happened.  He made it and stepped out onto the depot platform where waiting for him was Uncle Vincent himself. A flush of relief and joy swept over him.  At last he was in again with family.  His journey was truly over.  He had arrived.

Hico is located in North Central Texas, at the junction of today’s U.S. Highway 281 and State Highways 6 and 220, in northeastern Hamilton County.  A post office was first established there in 1860 shortly before the beginning of the American Civil War. [^25]  By 1874 the town had eight businesses, including a cotton gin, although most residents raised cattle and horses. Construction of the Texas Central Railroad in 1880 prompted the citizens to move 2½ miles to the line.  Hico was incorporated three years later and became the county's shipping center. The population stood at 1,480 in 1890 when a fire destroyed business houses on the east side of Pecan Street.  A few weeks later, another fire ravaged the west side.  Rebuilding in stone ended the fire menace, but periodic overflows of the Bosque River have remained a threat to low-lying areas.  Over the years, Hico has prospered as cotton and cattle market center. [^26]  Vincent Wieser moved here in 1891 and opened the first of his mills.  He soon established the Hico Compress

Company, the Hico Ice and Cold Storage Company, the Hico Electric Light and Power Company, the Hico National Bank and, of course, the J. F. Wieser & Company.  In 1940, although its population had declined to 1,242, the town was incorporated and had a post office, a bank, and fifty businesses, but the Wieser mills had been moved, first to Hamilton. Hico continued to decline and had a population low of 925 in 1970, but now it is slowly rebounding. [^27]

img014 [^28]

**Galveston Causeway to Mainland – 1914**

Only Vincent and a servant met him at the station.  The rest of the family members were at their homes or were not living in Hico at this time.  Henry, a son of Vincent’s, for example, lived in and ran the mill in Dublin.  Vincent was there at the depot in his new Buick, a long, open touring car with side curtains to keep out the cold air.  Taken to Vincent’s house, Joseph was greeted in a manner that he later described as “warm.”  All appeared to be friendly and made him feel at home for the moment.  The family had evidently discussed with Vincent about where they would place him.  But, the warmth that Joseph was expecting to find was not to last.  After polite introductions and questions, most of which Joseph could not properly understand without the help of Vincent, Joseph was shown to his room.  Dinner would be served soon.  He was told that then he could get some badly needed rest and perhaps tomorrow or the day after or whenever he had recovered from his journey, they would discuss his living arrangements.  There was a hint that he would be sent to Dublin to work with Henry.  The next morning, however, it became quite obvious to Joseph that the family had already decided where he should be placed and that there were no days for recovering from his journey.

Joseph was both tired and relieved that he had at last made it to America.  The initial introductions were awkward, for none spoke German except Uncle Vincent, but the translations went well and enough was understood with Vincent’s help to make this first evening in America a pleasant one.  The large two-story clapboard house stood in the center of a single, city block surrounded by a picket fence that creating a very large yard.  It was a striking and imposing structure and obviously sent a message that someone of importance lived there.  Vincent had deliberately driven up to the front entrance for Joseph to experience the whole perspective of his arrival.  Joseph was impressed.  This was all that Vincent had said that America was about.  Inside, Joseph found that many rooms were heated for the results of the recent norther could still be felt and the smell of burning wood, which was quite different from the coal fired stoves to which he had been accustomed in Germany, threw a different scent into the air.  To Joseph this difference was pleasing, but to him other things were startling.  Among them were the distinct footfalls echoed by shoes walking on a wooden floor.  In Germany floors had always been so solid.  Why were Americans building in this fashion?  It was only the beginning for Joseph of the many differences between European and American construction that he would experience.  For now, however, such things could wait.

For Joseph, it was a relief at last to be among relatives who he hoped would make him feel at home.  It had been a long time since he had felt a home with warmth.  Already Vincent was giving him fatherly advice and suggested that Joseph take time later that evening to write a letter home to his parents to let them know he was now safely in America.  He told Joseph that he would write one also, and that they could be mailed tomorrow.  He gave Joseph some personal stationary with his company’s letterhead.  It would begin a trend that Joseph followed the rest of his life: that is, he would use stationary with letterheads wherever he found them.  Joseph had even packed several sheets of stationary from his previous place of employment, Bass and Keller, but these he would use later.  For now he used the stationary of his uncle, for those others were still in his luggage that had been placed on the veranda.  So on  the  first  day  of  his  arrival  in  America,  both  sat  down  to  write  letters.   Vincent  may  not  have  known  of  the  situation  in Volkertshausen and consequently addressed his letter to “relatives,” which is in itself rather strange.  Vincent wrote the following letter on the day of Joseph’s arrival in Hico, very likely not the only one that he had written since visiting there in 1910, but if there were others before or since, they have not survived.  Vincent’s letterhead was impressive for it listed no fewer than eight companies that he owned along with his sons.  It would give Joseph’s mother another reason to ponder the wonderful opportunities that awaited Joseph.  If, however, he addressed the letter to his parents in Volkertshausen, a mystery arises as how it finally arrived at his mother’s place in Tuttlingen.

President Hico Compress Company, Inc.

President Hico Ice and Cold Storage Company, Inc.

President Hico Electric Light and Power Company, Inc. President Dublin Mill and Elevator Company, Inc.

President Stamford and Hamlin Mill and Elevator Company, Inc. President Munday Mill and Elevator Company, Inc.

President Dublin Gas and Light Company, Inc.

Vice President Hico National Bank, Hico, Texas

Secretary J.  F.  Wieser & Company, Hico, Texas

V.  F.  WIESER

*Hico, Texas, March 17   1914 Dear Relatives,* [^29]

*Yesterday noon, your son and brother, Benedict, arrived in good health and we will do our best for him.  He came through his trip quite well.   Already the peaches are in full bloom and otherwise we are all in pretty good health.*

*We look forward to a good year and have had many Mexicans arriving here for work in the plant.  It is only about 100 hours to the border.  There are, of course, many soldiers along the border, but the Mexican Poncho Via has not been sighted.   Naturally, we are going to stay on this side. Best wishes to your mother from us all.*

*Vincent*

Uncle Vincent was a man of few words.  It is interesting that he actually took time to acknowledge the arrival of Joseph, for it revealed that he was a kind man, concerned about the well-being of his new recruit into whose hands Joseph’s life in America would rest.  He wanted to demonstrate that he was going to commit to making Joseph’s path here as smooth as possible for him.  Joseph’s mother would have found that encouraging, but very likely Wendelin never saw this letter.  Vincent’s letter was quite formal and very businesslike.  It is ironic, that Vincent mentions peaches, for they will come to play an important role in Joseph’s life in Texas.  More significantly, however, was his mentioning of the crisis along the Texas border, for that was of great interest to everyone in Texas at this time.  It also projected an image that Texas was still a wild country and a place where a great amount of legend was still being created.

Actually, the situation in Texas was far from settled.  Relations between Texas and Mexico had never been good, and after Texas  was  annexed  to  the  United  States,  the  United  States  supposedly  assumed  responsibilities  for  national  defense  and  all international relations with Mexico.  That assumption really never sat well with most Texans as the United States had consistently failed to understand its role as a neighbor, nor did government in Washington D.C. understand with what border states had to contend with in dealing with Mexico. [^30]  Of course, Texans and their Texas Rangers always had their own solutions, often quite viciously carried out, but satisfactory to Texans.  If Joseph had not heard of the role of Texas Rangers in Texas’ history,  he was about to learn.  The new 20th century was proving not to be any different from the previous one.  Already, because of unstable conditions in Mexico, on Feb 23, 1913, barely a year prior to Joseph’s arrival, (as a precautionary measure), outgoing President William H. Taft had ordered three transports and two brigades to Galveston. [^31]  Joseph could not help but have noticed the thousands of American troops encamped in what seemed to be endless rows along the beach of Galveston as the SS *Brandenburg* was assisted toward its moorings.  Something, he thought, certainly was going on, for Galveston took on all the appearances of an armed camp.

On February 24, 1913, fighting had commenced along the border near Brownsville, Texas, and on March 2, Mexicans attacked U.S. troops along the border near Douglas, Arizona. Also, in the last month of his administration, President Taft had sent a large military force into Texas and stationed them along the Rio Grande, supposedly to protect Americans in that region. There was some thought their placement might be to protect Mexicans from Texans.  Of course, this show of force caused Mexican militants to redirect their violence from their own countrymen to Americans. [^32]  Texans felt their wrath first, which served to unify them as they considered Taft’s move a threat to their sovereignty.  Perhaps it was a time for all Mexicans to come together. Taft’s decision was made at a time when Mexico had been embroiled in a violent revolution since the fall of 1910, with opposing political and military forces struggling for control of the country. [^33] Now all sides had a reason to attack Americans because of Taft’s actions.

Later, when Woodrow Wilson succeeded President Taft, he denounced the new revolutionary government in Mexico and refused to recognize any faction as the legitimate government. As a result of his attitude, violence toward Americans intensified, and more  incidents  of  murder,  robbery,  kidnappings  for  ransom,  and  property  destruction  occurred.  In  response  to  the  violence, President Wilson finally sent 4,800 regular army troops under General John “Blackjack” Pershing to defend the border towns and their citizens. [^34] With all that activity, Joseph certainly had to ask himself if he were immigrating to a war zone.

The 5th Brigade, comprised of 4000 men, had been sent to Galveston the year before Joseph’s arrival and was housed mostly in tents on the parade grounds of Ft. Crockett.  Ft. Crockett was the small post which accommodated coastal artillery within the limits of the city itself.  Joseph also noticed the intense activities surrounding the many army transport ships docked at Ft. Crocket’s piers near the railroad switches. [^35] Actually, more was going on than Joseph could have understood at that time, for tensions were strained, not only between Mexico and the United States, but also between the United States and Texas.  Vincent may have

hinted at problems, but as all Texans, he very likely had the same opinions about the actions of the United States.  Joseph had a lot to comprehend about his new country to which he had immigrated, and it certainly took his mind away from thinking about returning to Germany.

Just a month before Joseph’s arrival, a South Texas rancher’s murder by Mexican troops in February 1914 had outraged Texans and increased tension between Mexico and the United States. The rancher had allowed his horses to graze on an island in the Rio Grande, an island that was supposedly on the United States side of the border. This land was disputed, and it is unclear whether it belonged to the United States or Mexico. Despite being warned against meeting with Mexican officials in Mexico, on the morning of Friday the 13th, the rancher and a nephew crossed over to Mexico to meet with several soldiers who had called them over.  After an exchange of words, the ranchers were seized and carried to a nearby military garrison.  The nephew escaped and returned to the United States to spread the alarm. Immediately, Texas officials became involved, and news accounts inflamed the area of South Texas along the border.  Texas Governor Colquitt demanded that charges be brought against the Mexican officers. Colquitt wanted them extradited to Texas with the help of the Texas Rangers if necessary. Washington reacted then as they do today with a vague offer of help.  United States Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan stated that use of the Rangers would constitute an invasion of Mexico, an act only the federal government had the authority to permit. The situation erupted into an even greater furor when witnesses told American officials that they had seen the rancher’s body hanging from a tree near the Mexican village, and that it had been there for at least 10 days.  The rancher’s body was finally "delivered" to his relatives in Texas on March 7, just ten days prior to Joseph’s arrival. [^36]  Not only was the governor incensed, but also all of Texas newspapers were enraged and demanded something be done.  Joseph had felt the tensions emanating from Texans surrounding the American camps on the island as he headed for the railroad depot.  The frustration of the federal government was evident everywhere, and hostilities against Mexico were intense!

When the Texas governor had asked the State Department for permission to allow his Rangers to cross the Rio Grande, it was, of course, immediately denied.  When he asked to which Mexican authority an extradition request should be sent, Secretary of State Bryan replied that it should go the “the chief executive authority” of Mexico; however, since the United States recognized none of the opposing generals, this vague instruction in effect meant that Washington was washing its hands of the matter, as they continue to do to this day, and Governor Colquitt was on this own. [^37] Not afraid to act on his own, Colquitt announced in a speech to the Cattle Raisers Association of Texas a $1,000 reward for the arrest of the rancher’s murderers wherever they might be found. [^38]  The governor of Texas had basically instructed his adjutant general to arrange a kidnapping or multiple kidnappings, if necessary, in a foreign country. [^39]  For Texans, this made perfect sense and so continued a long history of tension between Texas and Mexico. If the federal authorities would not help, he was prepared to take matters into his own hands.  Information gathered soon revealed that the rancher was in a cemetery, already buried in a shallow grave.   The recovery of his body caused an additional uproar in and of itself. [^40] Every Texas newspaper boy screamed about the killing in their headlines at Galveston corners that even Joseph could not fail to understand that he had arrived in the midst of an explosive situation not just between the United States and Mexico, but also between Texans and the United States.

The kidnapping of a Texas rancher outraged many people against President Wilson's Mexico policy and placed the Texas governor in direct opposition with the President. [^41] The President needed to act.  Wilson responded by moving more troops along the Mexican border. The incident was another example of the use of the Texas Rangers as a paramilitary state police force. [^42]  Meanwhile, Wilson also had ordered the U.S. Navy to prepare for the occupation of the port of Veracruz; [^43] consequently, all of Galveston was on alert in preparations. While waiting for authorization from Congress, the President was alerted to a German delivery of weapons to General Huerta and issued an immediate order to seize the port's customs office and confiscate the weaponry.  The weapons shipment, in fact, originated from the Remington Arms Company in the U.S. and was being shipped to Huerta via Hamburg, Germany as a way to skirt the arms embargo. [^44]  Germany, however, clearly received the blame for forwarding the shipment of arms on to Mexico.  Wilson used this incident to begin his campaign against Germany, an effort that became quite clear to Joseph as he settled into his newly adopted land.

In midst of the Mexican Revolution, the *de facto* head of state struggled to hold his power and territory intact from the challenges in the South and the fast advance of the opposition Constitutionalists in the North. By March 26, 1914, just ten days after Joseph arrived in Texas; one force was only ten miles from the prosperous oil town of Tampico, Tamaulipas. [^45] The Tampico Affair, as it came to be known, started off as a minor incident involving American sailors and Mexican land forces loyal to a general of the Mexican Revolution.[^46]   A long string of diplomatic insults by the Mexican government came to head when nine unarmed American sailors  from  the  USS  *Dolphin*,  in  the  process  of  procuring gasoline  for  their  small  boat,  were  arrested  for  allegedly  entering  a prohibited zone in Tampico. [^47]   Though the sailors were released an hour and a half after their capture, the Mexican government refused to apologize.  Wilson now had an excuse to invade Mexico. [^48]  That the Huerta regime had taken prisoners of some unarmed U.S. sailors found at the port of Tampico inspired President Wilson to send the U.S. fleet to Galveston and Mexico’s eastern coast.  In April, less than a month after Joseph had arrived at Galveston, the U.S. moved to seize Veracruz, bombarding the city as it landed marines.   Within weeks, the United States transport ships that Joseph had seen docked in Galveston, took part in the occupation of Veracruz, Mexico.   On 24 April newspapers reported the USAT *McClellan* had nosed away from Pier 15 and was headed toward the Gulf of Mexico.  More than 20,000 citizens lined the wharves to watch the sailing of the troops, and when the transports cast loose moorings, a cheer went up all along the line.  Bands were playing on all vessels as they went to sea accompanied by destroyers. [^49] Joseph could have witnessed firsthand the eagerness of Americans to defend their soil had he lingered in Galveston.  The Texas newspapers printed numerous headlines about them.  The American transports, carrying a total of 4,000 troops, arrived off Veracruz on the 27th. [^50]

U.S. forces established control of the port and remained in occupation for six months.[^51] In the fighting between the marines and Huerta’s forces, nineteen Americans were killed, and seventy were wounded. Mexican deaths were 193, and an estimated

600 were wounded.  The invasion by the U.S. outraged many in Mexico and elevated Huerta, who was perceived as fighting against “the gringos.”  Meanwhile, mobs in Mexico City were assaulting American businesses. Still, to the surprise of President Wilson, the invasion by the U.S. outraged many in Mexico. [^52]  The misunderstanding fully transpired into the breakdown of diplomatic relations between the two countries, and the occupation of the port city of Veracruz by the United States continued for over six months.**  Was a war about to erupt?  There was a considerable concentration of American citizens in the area due to the immense investment of American firms in the local oil industry.  Several American warships were sent to the area with the expectation of protecting American citizens and property. [^53]  Joseph must have felt as if he had moved to the front lines of a combat zone when he arrived in Texas.  The border of Mexico, as Uncle Vincent had pointed out, was only hours away.

The incident further worsened relations between the two countries. [^54]  Strangely, two of the opposing Mexican generals were just too focused on their efforts against one another to make any resistance to the American occupation.  The occupation brought the U. S. and Mexico closer to the brink of war [^55] **as** the struggle for control of Mexico continued throughout the balance of 1914.[^56]  It was a struggle that had begun about the time that Vincent made his pilgrimage back to Volkertshausen and was far more complex than what Joseph could gleam from the headlines of newspapers, now that he was in Texas.  In 1910 people in Mexico had felt that they had been disenfranchised. Three-fifths of the population was Indian, who had been losing traditional lands for decades to those that were considered whiter than the majority of Mexicans.  The great bulk of Mexico’s land had been taken over by about a thousand men, their great estates reaching thousands and sometimes millions of acres, while ninety-seven percent of the population in the countryside  owned  no  land.   Additionally,  Mexico’s  middle  classes  were  unhappy  about  the  amount  of  favoritism  that  their government was giving to foreign businessmen.  This growing discontent and especially the discontent of the poor could not be expressed in elections.  Mexico’s president, Porfirio Diaz, [^57] had been in reality a dictator. He had ruled Mexico for thirty years, but his power was crumbling as Mexico’s young elite and middle class youth were less tolerant of him than their parents had been. [^58]  The country had been ripe for a revolution for some time before Joseph’s arrival in Texas.  In 1913, the revolution had begun when a successful coup d’état by Victoriano Huerta brought him to the presidency of Mexico. [^59]  How much Joseph read of this in German newspapers remains unknown, but he could not have failed to notice the amount of coverage incidents in Mexico were getting in the Texas press.

Additionally, General Huerta was trying to enhance his status among his people as a hero by vowing to invade Texas. [^60]  That certainly was another announcement that must have struck some fear in Joseph’s mind.  The armies of three Mexican generals, however, soon occupied Mexico City.[^61] Those opposing President Huerta had increased their military activities until they controlled about three-quarters of Mexico by the spring of 1914, confining Huerta and his followers to the areas around Mexico City, the capital, and Veracruz. [^62]   Frustrated by the political mishandlings of the government, two Mexican generals sympathized with Mexico’s poor.  One hoped to give the lands that President Diaz had seized during his rule back to the people.  His guerillas controlled southern Mexico and destroyed that region’s crops and livestock. Meanwhile, Pancho Villa’s [^63] army seized control of northern Mexico and destroyed roads, railroads, homes, businesses, crops, and livestock. Subsequent food shortages caused widespread starvation, disease, and epidemics.   The economic chaos reigned for years following Joseph’s immigration.[^64]  But, it was Ernst, not Joseph, who would experience these vacillating forces in Mexico first hand.

Although safe on this side of the border, Texas was by all definition still very much on a  frontier.  At present, however,  Joseph and Vincent could observe the saga safely from Vincent’s Central Texas operations.  Using Uncle’s stationary that first evening in Texas, he penned his first letter to his mother.   He summed up his trip perfectly.  He quickly put his mother at ease with assurances of a friendly reception, where he would be staying, and comments about his ocean voyage.  He made no reference to the troubles with Mexico.  It is also clear that he had gotten along well with his fellow passengers although his impatience with the long days at sea was his most difficult challenge.  He also acknowledged that his trip was paid for by Uncle Vincent.  Tomorrow would be another day.  For now his long journey was over.  He had safely arrived into the arms of his Uncle Vincent or so he thought.

*Hico, Texas, March 17, 1914*

*Dear Mother,*

*I arrived yesterday in Hico at Uncle Vincent’s and was warmly greeted.  Today and tomorrow I will remain here and then I probably will travel to Dublin,[^65] some twenty-two miles from here (about seven hours).  I think that I will be living there *for a while with Uncle Vincent’s son.*

*I just do not know where they are going to assign me yet; however, it has been decided that the best is to leave the decision up to Henry until I have recovered from my trip. I just cannot say yet how it will work out.  I will write to you again in two or three weeks.*

*The trip aboard the steamer Brandenburg was rather uneventful and far from being as interesting as I had imagined.  I never became seasick, which is a wonder, for it certainly could have gone badly for me on this trip, especially if there had been a severe storm.  There were approximately one thousand passengers on board, but as far as any storm went, there were only those produced by the feathers that came out of our pillow fights.*

*There were eight Germans on board and are all in the picture enclosed.*   We all got along well and told stories among ourselves to pass away the time.  The waiting was the worst part, something which was especially difficult for me.  After eight days, at sea I could not eat the food anymore.*

*I am fortunate that Uncle Vincent arranged to pay for my passage over here.   Consequently, I have only spent around twenty Marks and find my position here quite sufficient at the moment.*

*I shall close this letter by hoping that this finds you in good health and from all here a very “hearty greeting.” Your son, Benedict*

img015

[^1]: **Es muß gehen!*** A German saying that J.B. loved to use as an example.  Simply translated it means “it must go on.” Or, “when things get tough, one must endure.”  J.B. would use this story often for the rest of his life to illustrate a point.  He got great joy in switching the first letters of the last two words.

[^2]: “**Like it or lump it**” – was a favorite phrase used by J.B., and it simply meant that one must accept a situation he did not particularly like because he could not change it.

[^3]: It is difficult to determine whether J.B. saved some money for immigrating.  He often said that he arrived in American with 65¢ in his pocket.  Vincent, however, clearly paid for his passage and in the year that followed, funded J.B.’s education in San Antonio.

[^4]: **Sollingen** – A German city noted for its ability to manufacture the highest quality surgical instruments, especially from stainless steel.  They also produced some of the finest tableware for home use.

[^5]: This tin-lined copper kettle was brought to Texas by Anna on her visit there in 1966.  It remains in the possession of Mark to this day.

[^6]: **Kleiderschrank** – a standing clothes closet popular at the turn of the 20th century, for many rooms in older houses were built without closets.  Here Joseph kept a small cigar box of currency, his gold cuff links, ties, and a few shirts, pants, and coats.  Joseph’s Kleiderschrank was sold in 1961 for $3.00 to a Mr. Pfeister, a local junk man.

[^7]: **Hauptbahnhof** – is the main train station in larger German cities.*

[^8]: **SS Brandenburg** - The ship that took J*.*B. to America was the SS *Brandenburg*, built in 1901 for the Norddeutscher Lloyd (line) at Vegesack, Germany. At 7,532 tons; 429 feet long x 54 feet broad, it sported only one funnel and two masts; twin-screw propulsion gave it a service speed 13 knots. Early in 1902, the two great German lines, Hamburg-American and North German Lloyd reached a 10-year agreement with J. Pierpont Morgan that affiliated them. She sailed on her maiden voyage to New York on March 22, 1902. Her career was not a good one.  She spent the whole of World War One interned at Trondheim, Norway and was awarded to Britain as a war prize in 1919 by the Treaty of Versailles.She had a capacity for 60 second class passengers.The awning deck steamers of the "Köln" class which comprised the "Brandenburg” represented a type which corresponded with the particular requirements of the service for which they were built. While possessing only limited cabin accommodation, some 1,660 third-class passengers and steerage passengers could be jammed together much like ordinary cargo down below. Apart from the lofty sections having large, numerous ports with ample light, there were in two sections of the main deck, outside cabins for 4 to 10 persons. Vincent had seen to it that J.B. found a berth in one of these rooms. The **SS Brandenburg** maintained interchangeable routes throughout its history but ran mainly in the Bremen-Baltimore service. In March 1914, it obviously was running a route from Bremen to Galveston, confirmed by Galveston immigration records.  Changeable routes and the turnover of liners (changing names) were a simple matter of ever changing technology. Within months after J.B.’s journey in 1915, she was sold after only fifteen years of service and became a member of the Lloyd Italian Lines and renamed the **Lloyd Sabudo**. Then she was sent to Norway where she was interned for the duration of the war. In 1917 she became the **Hecuba*** (U.S. Government).  In 1919, she was surrendered to Great Britain as war reparations demanded by the Treaty of Versailles. In 1922 she became a member of the Alfred Holt's Blue Funnel Line, but that July she was rammed while at anchor in Constantinople by the Byron vessel "**Maid of Milos**." She had just been purchased by the Ocean Steam Ship Co. for the Australasian service but was returned in such poor condition, she was sold to Italian ship breakers in August 1924 and once again renamed, this time as the *Ada* for her final voyage. A rather undistinguished career came to an end a year later when she was finally scrapped after just 24 years of service. - FACTS and TIDBITS - http://home.gowebway.com/~arnie/II.htm - accessed December 23, 2008, Margaret Odrowaz-Sypniewska, The SS Brandenburg - http://www.angelfire.com/mi4/polcrt/Brandenburg.html - accessed December 23, 2008, hereinafter noted as Odrowaz-Sypniewska, **The SS Brandenburg**.  Devon Hawkins, Immigrant Ship Transcribers Guild, 15 June 2001 - http://www.immigrantships.net/v4/1900v4/brandenburg19110810.html– (accessed December 23, 2008), ALFRED HOLT & CO THE BLUE FUNNEL LINE - http://www.red-duster.co.uk/BLUEFUN14.htm - (accessed December 24, 2008), Norway Heritage - http://www.norwayheritage.com/p\_ship.asp?sh=brand – (accessed December 24, 2008) Edward Marshall, The Cotterill Report on Steerage Conditions on Steamships in 1913 - http://www.gjenvick.com/Steerage/1913-11-30- CotterillReportOnSteerageConditions.html - (accessed December 24, 2008), http://www.schiffe-maxim.de/Brandenburg.html - (accessed December 24, 2008).

[^9]: Postcard - http://www.schiffe-maxim.de/Brandenburg.html - (accessed December 24, 2008).

[^10]: Odrowaz-Sypniewska, **The SS Brandenburg***

[^11]: Ibid. img016

[^12]: Cover page of the Passenger List booklet owned by Devon Hawkins (devonh@yahoo.com) of the Immigrant Ship Transcribers Guild, 15 June 2001. – http://www.immigrantships.net/v4/1900v4/brandenburg19110810.html - accessed August 24, 2010.

[^13]: The Cotterill Report on Steerage Conditions on Steamships in 1913 - By Edward Marshall - http://www.gjenvick.com/Steerage/1913-11-30-CotterillReportOnSteerageConditions.html - (accessed December 24, 2008) – here after noted as Marshall, The Cotterill Report on Steerage.

[^14]: Joseph appeared to be overdressed for the work assignments he was about to be given him by Vincent’s sons.

[^15]: The Galveston Hurricane of 1900 was the greatest natural disaster to ever strike the United States.  Much of the city of Galveston was destroyed along with the loss of at least 6,000 lives.  Galveston Storm of 1900 – NOAA History: A Science Odyssey - http://www.history.noaa.gov/stories\_tales/cline2.html - assessed August 24, 2011.

[^16]: The photograph taken aboard the *SS* Brandenburg is in the possession of M. Wieser.

[^17]: Lorenz, Gilliam, and Gullett Hafner - Fort Crockett and the occupation of Veracruz, Mexico - http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~katloregen/FtCrockett.htm - (accessed August 1, 2010). Hereafter referenced as Lorenz - Ft. Crockett - Hereafter referred to as Lorenz – Fort Crockett.

[^18]: Rosenberg Library, Galveston, Texas– (accessed December 11, 2008).

[^19]: Port of Entry at Galveston, Texas, 1913.

[^20]: **The Strand** is one of Galveston’s most famous landmarks.  Because of the Port of Galveston’s enormous vessel traffic annually, the Stand became a popular place for major businesses to locate there. Much business elected to move away after the Galveston Hurricane of 1900.  At the time J.B. passed through its streets, many buildings were deserted, and some had lost entire floors, and other elaborate comices and flourishes and presented an appearance of abandonment.

[^21]: Lorenz – Fort Crockett. – (accessed August 1, 2010).

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Loading Cotton, Galveston, TX 1909 - http://www3.familyoldphotos.com/photo/texas/10785/loading-cotton-galveston-texas- 1909 - (accessed July 31, 2010).

[^24]: “**Nein Danke**” is the German way of saying “no thank you.”

[^25]: The American Civil War took place between 1860-1865.  This region of Texas supported the cause of the Confederacy and exposed Joseph of racism in its ugliest form.

[^26]: *Handbook of Texas Online*, s.v. "," http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/HH/hjh8.html (accessed September 14, 2008).

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: Top of Famous Two Million dollar Causeway, Galveston, Texas, ca 1915 - http://www.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~txpstcrd/Towns/Galveston/GalvestonCauseway.jpg - (accessed July 31, 2010).

[^29]: This letter is address simply as “Dear Relatives.”  Vincent may not have been told of Wendelin’s leaving or he may have learned from other sources.  If he had, he might have addressed this letter singularly to Maria Wieser.  Since Joseph never reveals the whole story to his immediate family, it may well be that he never told Vincent either.

[^30]: A century later the United States government still has not understood what border states suffer along the border.  In 2010 the Obama Regime has sued the state of Arizona for that state’s enforcement of Federal Law.

[^31]: Lorenz – Fort Crockett.

[^32]: Military: Mexican Expedition - http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/mexican\_expedition.htm - (accessed August 1, 2010).

[^33]: Ibid.

[^34]: Ibid.

[^35]: Lorenz - Ft. Crockett

[^36]: Vergara, Clemente -*Handbook of Texas Online*, s.v. "," http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/VV/fve15.html (accessed August 1, 2010). Hereafter referenced as Vergara - *Handbook of Texas Online*

[^37]: Harris, Charles H. III, and Louis R. Sadler, *Texas Rangers and the Mexican Revolution:  The Bloodiest Decade, 1910-1920,* p 167. Hereafter referenced as Harris – Bloodiest Decade

[^38]: Vergara - *Handbook of Texas Online*

[^39]: Harris – Bloodiest Decade - p. 70.

[^40]: Ibid. - p. 168; Dallas *News*, March 1, 2, 1914.

[^41]: A full and factual account of this incident that occurred about a week before Joseph’s arrival in Galveston can be found in The Texas Rangers and the Mexican Revolution: The Bloodiest Decade, 1910-1920, written by Charles H. Harris, III and Louis R. Sadler, University of Albuquerque: 2004.  There is much more than to this story than what was made known to Texans at the time.  Governor’s Colquitt’s political friend and sheriff personally made the arrangements with Mexican officials to allow the rancher to cross into Mexico, something of which the governor was unaware when he threatened to send over the Texas Rangers to avenge the abduction.

[^42]:*Handbook of Texas Online*, s.v. "," http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/VV/fve15.html (accessed August 1, 2010).

[^43]: **Victoriano Huerta** (1850-1916) - A Mexican military officer and president of Mexico. Huerta's supporters were known as *Hueristas* during the Mexican revolution. - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Victoriano_Huerta - accessed September 2, 2010.

[^44]: Lorenz - Ft. Crockett.

[^45]: Tampico Affair: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tampico_Affair - (accessed August 1, 2010). Hereafter referenced as Tampico Affair. img017

[^46]: Ibid.

[^47]: As Tampico was laid siege by Constitutionalist forces, relations between U.S. forces and President Huerta's federal garrison remained amicable. The American naval force, limited to a single modest gunboat, the USS *Dolphin*, due to the navigational constraints of the shallow harbor entrance, presented a 21-gun salute to the Mexican flag three times on April 2, 1914 to pay tribute to the celebrated occupation of Puebla in 1867 by Mexican General Porfirio Díaz in the last phases of the French intervention in Mexico. The commander of the USS *Dolphin* arranged for a pickup of oil from a warehouse on April 9 near a tense defensive position at Iturbide Bridge. The defenders of the bridge anticipated an attack based on the two consecutive days of skirmishes that had immediately occurred. Nine U.S. sailors on a whaleboat flying the U.S. flag were dispatched to the warehouse along a canal. Mexican federal soldiers were alerted to the activity and confronted the American sailors. Neither side was able to speak the other's language, which left the sailors immobile in the face of commands from the soldiers. The Mexicans raised rifles against the Americans, including the sailors still on the boat, and ushered the men to the nearby Mexican regimental headquarters.** The commander of American forces in the area, Rear Admiral Henry T. Mayo, demanded a formal apology from Huerta's government. The commander in the Tampico area complied with this and gave a written apology; however, he did not follow the demands that Mexico raise the United States flag on its soil and provide a 21-gun salute. U.S.**   President Woodrow Wilson asked Congress for permission for an armed invasion of the area. The United States occupation of Veracruz had begun. **-** http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tampico\_Affair - (accessed August 1, 2010).

[^48]: Lorenz - Ft. Crockett.

[^49]: General Funston Sails", *The New York Times*, 1914-04-25, Tampico Affair: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tampico\_Affair - (accessed August 1, 2010).

[^50]: Ibid.

[^51]: Early on April 21, 1914, the Mexican military commandant was notified that US forces intended to take charge of the Custom House and was urged to "offer no resistance but to withdraw in order to avoid loss of life and property of the people of Vera Cruz." He, for the most part complied, but the commander of the Naval Academy and unorganized pockets of individuals offered resistance. Ships of the Atlantic Fleet started bombardment of Veracruz. By 11:30 AM the first detail of 787 soldiers, of whom 502 were marines, landed and seized the custom house, and an urban battle ensued in which many civilians are said to have taken part. The defense of the city also included the release of prisoners held at the feared *San Juan de Ulua* prison. In the meantime, the building of the Naval Academy was being bombarded by the USS *Prairie*. American troops occupied most of the town by that evening.**  Out of a total of 6,000 US Marines landed, 18 were killed. At least 400 Mexican civilians were killed. On April 30th the army's 5th Infantry Brigade went ashore to relieve the marines and occupy the city under a military government. Occupation lasted into late 1914. **-** Lorenz – Fort Crockett.

[^52]: The Mexican Revolution – http://www.fsmitha.com/h2/ch03mex.htm - accessed September 12, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Mexican Revolution.

[^53]: Ibid.

[^54]: Tampico Affair.

[^55]: Lorenz - Ft. Crockett

[^56]: Mexican Expedition - http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/mexican\_expedition.htm - (accessed August 1, 2010).

[^57]: **Porfirio Diaz** – (1830-1915) - perhaps qualifies as one of Mexico’s most controversial statesmen. President of the country for 30 years, Diaz is frequently remembered as being one of the country’s most notorious dictators. The bitter irony to his record lies in his accomplishments, of which there were many. Diaz brought Mexico into the modern age, and the country achieved financial solvency under his reign. - http://www.mexonline.com/history-porfiriodiaz.htm - accessed September 2, 2010.

[^58]: Mexican Revolution.

[^59]: Revolt in Mexico 1914-1915 - http://www.onwar.com/aced/data/mike/mexico1914.htm - accessed September 11, 2008

[^60]: Mexican Revolution.

[^61]: Ibid.

[^62]: http://www.onwar.com/aced/data/mike/mexico1914.htm - accessed September 11, 2008.

[^63]: **Pancho Villa** – (1878-1923) - Pancho Villa was a Mexican revolutionary leader who advocated for the poor and wanted agrarian reform. Though he was a killer, a bandit, and a revolutionary leader, many remember him as a folk hero. Pancho Villa was also responsible for a raid on Columbus, New Mexico in 1916, which was the first attack on U.S. soil since 1812. – Jennifer Rosenberg - http://history1900s.about.com/cs/panchovilla/p/panchovilla.htm - accessed September 2, 2010.

[^64]: Refugees of the Revolution, America and Mexico: A Fluctuating Relationship – http://74.125.95.104/search?q=cache:YpeFUHl8qBIJ:www.lcms.org/graphics/assets/media/WRHC/Historical%2520Background. doc+Mexican+work+force+1915+Texas&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=20&gl=us – accessed September 13, 2008.

[^65]: **Dublin, Texas** is today located on U.S. Highways 67 and 377 in southwest Erath County. It had been founded only sixty years before J.B.’s arrival by A. H. Dobkins and named in 1860, probably for the warning cry of impending Indian raids, "Double In," or perhaps for the double-log cabins used by early settlers, but definitely not for the capital of Ireland.  Growth increased in 1874 as Dublin acquired stagecoach service and a post office. In 1881 the Texas Central Railroad was built through to Mount Airy, a few miles from Dublin.   J. D. Bishop laid out a town site on the line four miles south of Mount Airy, which drew residents from old to new Dublin. Within a year the new Dublin had forty-five businesses and sixty-five homes, so the railroad moved its depot from Mount Airy to new Dublin. The town was incorporated in 1889. By 1890 the population was 2,025. It was 2,370 in 1900, but after that, the population slowly began to decline about the time J.B. arrived.  (By 1930, it would lose another 100.) Around 1914 the town was a center for agriculture and industry, clothing factories, peanut shelling and drying plants, a Wieser feed mill, milk processing, saddle and rope making, and metal stamping. At the time of J.B.’s arrival, Dublin had all the appearances of a thriving town on the American frontier and must have made quite an impression upon J.B., especially as an example that in America anything is possible. – William img016 R.  Hunt,  Handbook  of  Texas  Online,  s.v. ,
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/DD/hgd7.html  - accessed September 10, 2008.

