---
layout: ../../layouts/Post.astro
title: Welcome to Texas and to Vincent’s Family
subtitle: Chapter V
---

 Vincent had a beautiful and modern home in Hico. It was a large, framed,  two-story Victorian style house that stood in the very center of an entire block surrounded by a white picket fence that outlined its  perimeter, demonstrating the importance of its owner. Everything about it spoke of the success he and his sons had made since moving  to Texas a quarter century before. Shade trees were strategically planted around the house and offered relief from the blistering  sun whose rays, as Joseph would soon discover, could deliver serious sunburn to his fair skin. In the expansive yard surrounding the  mansion, Vincent often played croquet on quiet summer afternoons or in the evenings as he and his extended family sat outside  to enjoy the cooling breezes that no neighboring house could block. At 77 Vincent was spending more and more time at home,  enjoying the fruits of his labor and success. Joseph had only a brief opportunity to take in all that he was seeing. The overnight  train journey from Galveston had been exhausting even to a young traveler like Joseph. He was hurried to the house from the depot  where he was to be introduced to Vincent’s immediate family members later that evening. Much of what he tried to see would simply  have to wait until another time, for now was the time to meet his cousins. He was offered some time to refresh himself from his long  journey, and then Joseph was shown to this room where he changed clothes and readied himself to meet some of Vincent’s family.

 1 Vincent’s Home in Hico, Texas, ca 1910

Some time later, Joseph was summoned for dinner. The introductions of Vincent’s extended family quickly became a blur as there were so many new faces to meet and to remember. There was Mary, of course, Vincent’s delicate wife, dressed in her finest clothes. She, too, had been born in Germany, but it was now quite obvious that she was not one to contribute to doing much work around the house. She had fully adapted to the role of a southern lady. She had servants who did her work, and she obviously only directed the management of her household. A gaggle of his daughters, some with their husbands, looked on with indifference and a slight hint of distain upon their German cousin as if his arrival had been a mere nuisance. Obviously, they resented having been
summoned to meet him. Joseph could sense an immediate coldness that he had not expected from Vincent’s family. How could Vincent have exuberated such warmth when he visited his homeland if his family
held such distain for Germans? It was quickly obvious that there would be no reciprocity, although Joseph wrote his mother
that he was warmly welcomed.
The setting was everything that Joseph had expected of a successful American
household. Dinner was served on bone china
set on a large table covered with a brilliant, white tablecloth, accompanied by
a monogrammed set of sterling silver flatware and
accented by a starched, ironed napkin. It was good that Joseph had dressed
appropriately in his finer clothes this evening, for
appearances apparently were important to this family. He had never been served
by servants before, but he did just fine until he
noticed that everyone was watching from the corner of their eyes how he ate. He
was eating in a European style, but here it was
more in common with far rural areas of Texas. Vincent’s daughters thought it
uncouth, and their faces visibly registered their disgust
at this breach of southern etiquette. Joseph changed nothing but took note of
their reactions. It was only the first of what would
become a series of slights. After some awkward minutes and much small talk, all
in English that left Joseph only guessing at what was
being said, the women finished eating and excused themselves to retire to the
parlor as was the custom. There was some giggling
among Vincent’s daughters and slight chuckles from their spouses as they
departed the table.
This was not what he had expected.  This was not how his family, despite their
truly humble accommodations, had
welcomed their father in Volkertshausen not four years earlier. There would be
no more invitations to dine at Vincent’s and never at
any of his sons’ or daughters’ homes in Hico. Moreover, without the blessing of
the Wiesers of Hico, he would not be invited to
anyone else’s home in town. The protests registered later to Mary by her brood
may have been simply too great for their mother to
extend another invitation to the stranger their father had invited to America.
The sooner they set Joseph in his place and out of their
home, the better it would be for all. There was not much time for Joseph to
spend on explanations. Uncle Vincent wanted to hear of
things in Volkertshausen. How had those he had befriended just four years
earlier had fared since his departure? How were things in
85
Germany? What did he think of events in Europe? Joseph did his best to give
Vincent all the greetings that he had been instructed
to give, but it had been quite an exhausting day for him. He asked if he could
retire early, for the setting was awkward. Only he and
Vincent could talk German. The others just pretended to listen and understand.
Finally Joseph asked to be excused and retired to his
room. Tomorrow would be another day, and he would learn what Vincent had in
mind for him.
Vincent was an early riser and greeted Joseph at breakfast served in the formal
dining room, but Mary had already eaten and
was busy in her drawing room. Only servants and staff ate in the kitchen he was
to learn. As Joseph and Vincent had their second
cup of coffee, Vincent leaned closer and told Joseph that he had ordered the
car readied for around ten that morning to take him to
Dublin to live with his son Henry who would provide work for him. As that
reality sank in, Joseph grew quiet with disbelief, but
what could he do? As Vincent explained, it was thought that he should become
familiar with the language first. Everything seemed
reasonable the way Vincent was explaining the plan to him in as fatherly way as
possible. Perhaps, if he worked hard and proved his
worth, he could be brought back to Hico. So after only a short night’s rest,
Joseph’s trunks were loaded into the car.
2
Vincent playing coquet in the yard of his home. – 1910
He now had one more leg, the last leg of his journey to nearby Dublin, only
some 35 miles farther north. With luck the
driver could return before nightfall. There had been no attempt to show him the
town, albeit Hico was not very large. Nor was
Joseph introduced to neighbors or even any extended family members. Slowly,
Joseph was beginning to realize that all the things
Vincent had promised might not be forthcoming. Sensing some slight hesitancy,
Joseph ceased to volunteer more than what was
asked of him. He would reveal nothing of the situation of his parents and
deflect as many questions directed of Wendelin as possible.
He quietly gathered the few things he had removed from his trunks the evening
before and put them back.
In Dublin, Vincent and his sons operated the Dublin Mill and Elevator Company.
Henry, Vincent’s oldest son, managed it
and lived there. Not being assigned to Vincent’s mill in Hico was Joseph’s
first disappointment. Having been overjoyed at finally
arriving in Hico, Joseph had expected to be welcomed into the family, housed
there, and given work fitting to his training, a position
of some importance. After all, he had attended college to study bookkeeping. He
was trained and experienced! He had studied long
and hard to be able to use his mind. He certainly thought that he had something
of value to offer Vincent and repay him for his
efforts to provide his immigration here. However, being assigned Dublin seemed
to have dashed that hope. He did not know Henry.
He thought he knew Vincent. Was this the way Americans had grown to welcome
relatives? It confirmed Joseph’s conclusion that
there were forces going on behind the scenes to counter Vincent’s generosity.
Vincent, it became increasingly more apparent to
Joseph, could not deliver on his promises, for at 77 he was in reality no
longer in charge.
It took Joseph and his driver a few hours to reach Dublin, for the roads were
unpaved and washed out in some areas. The
route lay in the middle of the oak woods and prairies where miles and miles of
pure sand lay under a mass of oak trees whose
branches were springing to life with a tinge of green as the long winter was
nearing an end. Bluebonnets covered the wide open
spaces what seemed like miles of ocean. Most grasses were still wearing their
winter brown, but large areas had been burnt and now
showed a slight tinge of green, indicating that a new growth of grasses was
pushing its way to welcome the impending spring. As
Joseph surveyed the countryside, he thought this area to be perfect for peaches
and plums, like those he had already seen beginning
to bloom in the gardens of some farms they were passing. Always possessing an
inquiring mind, he asked and soon learned that the
larger fields were lying barren for the moment, waiting their turn to be
planted in peanuts and cotton. Peanuts were something new
to him. He had read about George Washington Carver and was eager to taste the
peanuts for himself, even if primarily to determine
if these Americans were eating things as strange as he had heard.
But peanut fields required deep sand, and the freshly turned fields meant much
dust was often swept from barren fields into
the air, especially when blue northers blew in from the northwest. More haze
and grit was fueled by the cars constantly bellowing up
vast clouds as they steadily bounced as rapidly as they could along the narrow
paths that could hardly be considered serviceable roads
between one small town and the next. Joseph’s coat and shirt were eventually
covered with a fine layer of dust, and he soon began
wiping away the grit that had caught in his eyes. The air being dry this March
morning proved to be an irritant. It was not long
before Joseph began to sneeze as his nose was meeting many of the pollens most
Texans had long since grown accustomed to.
86
Arriving in Dublin mid-afternoon, he was taken directly to the home of Henry.
There his driver was instructed to take him
to the mill where a row of small one-room cabins stood and where many were made
available to workers at the Dublin Mill and
Elevator Company. The mill was impressive, albeit a small operation, yet one
consisting of a complex series of elevators, sheds, and
teaming mill workers.  Henry was still at work in his office, but after a short
introduction, Joseph was told that one of his hands
would show him to his own living quarters nearby and that he was expected to
report to work at six sharp tomorrow. Joseph was
stunned.  Of course, Henry could speak no German, making the introduction
difficult and eliminating any thought of asking
questions about Germany. There would be no welcoming into Henry’s home, no
introduction to family, and no sharing of a meal.
“Tomorrow, you should wear some old clothes,” Henry conveyed to Joseph as best
as he could. The formalities were ended within
minutes as Henry instructed one of his hands to show Joseph his quarters.
Dublin, as far as Joseph could tell, was as typical a town as those he had
managed to see along the route from the coast. His
sense of observation was keen, and he made it a point to look closely at
things. Like so many small cities in Texas, life was centered
on a town square or a railroad station, as was Dublin. It was a typical also in
that everyone knew one another. Finding Henry still at
work had not been difficult, but he appeared to be somewhat annoyed at having
to do something for his father and seemingly gave an
outwardly appearance that he resented having been sent Joseph. What was the old
man thinking? He did not need this assignment.
What good could come of bringing their cousin into their midst?
Joseph was shown a single room cabin in which to set up his living quarters.
There was, fortunately, a cast iron heater that
stood in one corner. If Joseph wanted warmth, all he had to do was start a fire
and keep the stove fed. The wood was outside and an
axe lay nearby. His luggage, including the two trunks, was brought into his
room and with a somewhat heavy heart, Joseph began to
unpack his things. He had to find something for tomorrow to wear. He wanted to
make a good impression and did not want to be
late. There was no water in the house and no bathroom. He would have to draw a
bucket of water from the well and use the
outhouse that stood behind the cabins. He sat down on the bed that stood in one
corner of the room and surveyed his room. He
had left civilization for this. His heart was heavy with doubt. This was not
what Uncle Vincent had promised. Slowly, the depth of
his situation sank in. What was he going to do? After sitting on the edge of
his bed for a while, he eventually slumped over and fell
into a deep sleep.
The strenuous legs of his journey had finally caught up with him, and for the
first time, he relaxed despite the pressing
thoughts that weighed on his mind. Some few hours passed before he awoke.
Something startled him to consciousness. It was no
longer light outside, it was dark. With some effort he found the matchbox
within reach and hung on an old rusty nail near the stove,
and struck a match.  With its flare, he found the kerosene lantern and lit it.
The dim light that shown through the soot encased
cylinder dimly flickered to reveal his surrounding accommodations. Then, it
struck him. He had not eaten since breakfast and had
been given no indication as to where to find something to eat. Had that been
too much to expect from Henry? Was he considered a
charity case? Not to be even offered a cup of coffee in Henry’s home was
unheard of even by the modest courtesies so gladly given
by the poorest farmers in Volkertshausen. Joseph was left on his own in a
strange town, unable to speak a word of English and with
no clue as to where to find something to eat. Food would have to wait until
tomorrow. Tomorrow would be a new day. He would
make plans then. Unpacking could wait for tomorrow as well. He blew out the
failing light and fell back into his bed to await the
new day.
Six a.m. came sooner than he had wished, but Joseph had always been an early
riser, and he was up long before his
appointed hour. A black laborer dressed in clothes that had seen better days
had been sent to bring him to the mill. He was taken to
a shed and handed a broom. With head gestures and some loud talking, it was
made clear to him that he was to sweep the floors of
the warehouse. The wooden floors were caked with cottonseed and grain. Much
seemed to be glued to the wood. Nevertheless, he
had to scrape and clean it to perfection. He was also given the outhouses to
clean daily. Now the reality of Joseph’s position began
to sink in. Vincent had not indicated that this was what he had had in mind
when he spoke so glowingly of America. Joseph had fled
his father’s small acreage to avoid this kind of work. Now, thousands of miles
from home, he faced the same thing. His spirits sank
and continued to weigh heavily on him throughout this first day at work in
America. He became angrier as the day went on. Without
permission he took time to rest, to drink water, and to peel the fresh skin
from popped blisters on his hands. He wrapped his hand
in his handkerchief as he thought about his circumstances, and slowly he
resolved to develop a solution. Vincent’s family might have
seemed indifferent, but he would show them what he was made of. And so, he
began to plan.
Finally, his long first day came to a close. He was dead tired. He could go
home someone motioned to him, but first he
sought out a café and purchased his first meal. Later, that evening, he
carefully counted his remaining money that Vincent had given
him and calculated that if he watched his money, he could continue for a while
to take his meals at the café. Surely, he would
eventually be paid. Perhaps, he might even be invited to a meal at Henry’s, but
that proved to be wishful thinking. His cabin had no
kitchen and, of course, he did not wish to cook. Had he kept his teakettle, he
could have boiled water for tea, but that kettle he had
left with his sister. Coffee was what Americans drank and so would he.
At the end of the day, Joseph was exhausted and did not wish to stoke a fire in
his woodstove because he was just too tired.
He simply fell into his bed as he had done the night before. He had not seen a
single relative all day. It had been made perfectly clear
to Joseph that he was not one of them and that he was expected to be at work
seven days a week. There would be no time off for
now. After all, Vincent had paid Joseph’s expenses. “Certainly,” Henry told
Joseph, “you would want to repay Vincent for your
passage to America.” Certainly, he wanted to repay Vincent, but was Vincent
really expecting that? He would talk to him the next
time he had a chance. When he did, there was an understanding reached between
Vincent and Joseph. Joseph would work in Dublin
for a while yet, and then Vincent would help Joseph enroll into a school. The
long days began to pass a little more quickly now that
there was a plan. Days become weeks and weeks eventually became months. The
days were getting longer and as spring weather was
left behind, Central Texas was gripped in one of the hottest summers of record.
Sometime that summer, Vincent had also promised
to bring Joseph back to Hico where he would be nearer to him, but for now,
Joseph accepted his assignment without comment. He
87
became used to working alongside blacks and Mexicans. With them he began to
practice some of the Spanish that he had learned in
Germany. These were quite poor immigrants; whether they were legal or otherwise
did not matter at this time. They were looking
for work, any work, even at miserable wages. Texas’s relations with Mexico had
never been good. Joseph soon learned that their
situations were even worse than his. Many Texans simply did not like them, and
if Joseph thought himself in a difficult situation,
theirs was far worse.
Vincent had touched on the matter of Mexico in his letter to Joseph’s parents
announcing the safe arrival of Joseph only to
the extent that Texas lay very close to Mexico and very likely only hinted that
things could flare up at any moment, for Hico was very
close to the border with a country that could present a danger to those living
there. Whether he was trying to lay the seeds of
suspense or relate the dangers faced by Texans, we can only guess. However,
family members were impressed with the nearness of
Mexico to Texas and the adventure on the western frontier of Texas that two
generations later, the grandchildren of Anna would still
believe that Texans wore six-shooters and boots as a matter of daily life.
Meanwhile, there is also no way of knowing what Vincent
had told them of these problems in his 1910 journey to Volkertshausen. The
problems with Mexico did not affect Joseph in one way
or another, save for a brief time when he was seeking work in San Antonio, but
many Texans were aware of them and in some parts,
especially the area south of the Nueces River, they continued to be subjected
to constant and often serious Mexican threats at this
time.
In 1914 the situation along the Texas border became quite serious, and Joseph
could not escape the ramifications of its
consequences anymore than he could put the threat of war in Europe out of his
mind. Porfirio Diaz at one time was seen as one of
the heroes in Mexico’s struggle against French rule. Through a series of
revolts, he took the title of President of Mexico in 1876 and
proved himself to be a shrewd and ruthless individual, curtailing basic
freedoms and squelching any and all dissension through the use
of violence. Through his economic programs,  the rich benefitted greatly as
much of the country’s agricultural and mineral resources
were sold to foreign investors, and the poor became unbelievably destitute.
Francisco Madero, a popular author, won that election,
and Diaz had him jailed; then he claimed to have been reelected himself. Madero
called for an armed uprising, and a ragtag army of
revolutionaries ousted Diaz by April 1911. Madero assumed the presidency, but
because of his lack of political skills, he made the
mistake of leaving Diaz’ men in positions of influence. Madero was soon
captured and assassinated along with his vice-president. An
unscrupulous general, Victoriano Huerto named himself President of Mexico and
the second phase of the Mexican revolution began.
Many American capitalists supported Huerta, but President Woodrow Wilson, sworn
into office in March of 1913 as the new
American president, did not.3
The new President Huerta had tried to enhance his status among his people as a
hero by vowing to invade Texas.4  Always
a popular way in which to win support among Texans, this threat that did not go
unnoticed by Texans. Many Texans would have
welcomed a renewal of fighting Mexicans again.  However, soon news reached
Texas that the armies of other revolutionaries
occupied Mexico City.5 Those opposing President Huerta had increased their
military activities until they controlled about three-
quarters of Mexico by the spring of 1914, confining Huerta and his followers to
the areas around Mexico City, the capital, and
Veracruz.6  By July everyone could see that Huerta’s days as president were
numbered as several generals were converging on Mexico
City. He soon resigned and went into exile on a German ship that took him to
Spain.7 The fact that a German ship took the vilified
and deposed dictator away was not allowed to go without notice in the American
press at the behest of the new presidency.
The new leaders of Mexico now met to organize a government in late 1914, but
soon Mexico was torn by anarchy again as
each victorious general claimed the presidency for himself.8 Events along the
Texas-Mexican border became more uncertain than
ever as fighting took the war into a new year. In April 1915 one of the
generals named Zapata asked for President Wilson to receive
his delegation.9 Wilson denied the request because General Carranza, his rival,
had been recognized by the United States and eight
other nations in the Western Hemisphere as de facto president of Mexico. Still,
General Carranza could control only the northeastern
border area (the Mexican states along Texas) between Mexico and the United
States. This provided him easy access to those in Texas
from whom he purchased arms. He also had the expert military assistance of
General Obregon and had the shrewdness to promise
the people social reforms.10
Just days after Joseph had written another letter home, the unrest in Mexico
flared up again between the forces of General
Álvaro Obregón and Pancho Villa, the Mexican general of whom Vincent referred
to in his letter to Joseph’s mother. General
Obregón eventually defeated him by that summer but did not capture him.11
Consequently, the turmoil in Mexico continued. It
hardly made trade with Mexico feasible during most of 1915, nor did it put
Texans to rest about the problems in Mexico.12
Zapata, who had favored Villa, continued to suffer more defeats by Carranza’s
forces. On June 15 President Wilson called
on the warring sides in Mexico to negotiate and unify to form a stable Mexico,
but Carranza resented Wilson’s declaration, as did
most Mexicans. Carranza had now little reason to negotiate, for he was winning
by this time. His military victory against Villa won
him support across much of Mexico. Carranza’s forces also inflicted military
defeats against Zapata’s forces. Zapata eventually was
forced to withdraw his army to Morelos and neighboring states where he still
found support.13 The entire fate of Mexico continued
to be in flux for the balance of the summer of 1915. Texas newspaper heralded
headlines that Joseph could not help but see even if
his understanding of English did not give him an accurate understanding. He had
to know that the situation in Mexico was critical,
and that Texas would be affected one way or another. In mid-October 1915,
Woodrow Wilson finally recognized Carranza as
Mexico’s legitimate authority. Villa saw this as a betrayal and loudly reminded
the United States that it was he who had remained a
loyal friend to Americans. Villa now announced that he intended to strike
against “the gringos.”14 Such news only caused more
Texans to become angry and revengeful against Mexicans. For those competing
against Mexicans for jobs in Texas cities, the contest
became ugly. Racism was not the social taboo it became today. While Joseph
wrote marginally of the influx of Mexicans into the San
Antonio market, he did not appear vindictive or bigoted. That would never be
characteristic of him.
Joseph’s only letter to survive his first months in Dublin was written in the
midst of a summer heat wave. Things in Dublin
had not gone well. How much of his disappointment should he reveal to his
mother at this time? How would he ever be able to
88
explain his mistake of thinking American was the land of opportunity? Had Uncle
Vincent been only bragging about his chances?
And what good would it do to let his mother know? She would only urge him to
come home. His mother had enough of her own
troubles, not only in simply trying to stay alive, if her personal troubles
even allowed her to think about the threatening war, but also
in knowing that if the war threatened to spill over from the front lines in
France, there was a very real fear that she and her family
could physically be harmed. Of course, it was Anna, who probably was doing most
of the worrying at this point. Meanwhile, Joseph
needed to put on a good front at least for now. Always conscious of sending his
words on the proper stationary, he had taken a
number of sheets of stationary from his old employer in Langenargen, but
ironically, not any from Hirsch and Lichter, his most
recent employer in Stuttgart.
II15
Dublin, Summer 1914
Dear Mother,
For now, things are not going well because I know so little English. Learning
English is going very slowly, very slowly. Throughout the week, I
am so tired that by eight o’clock in the evenings I find myself already in bed.
I have only Sundays to myself. I eat properly and will do so as long as my
money holds out. I now eat lunch in a restaurant at about twenty-five cents a
day. For that amount, I can order a bowl of soup, a generous portion of meat,
and a cup of coffee. That is all. Vegetables and pasta I can order if I want to
pay another quarter. I try to do my own cooking in the mornings and in the
evenings. Evenings I usually have sweet milk and bread, but it is a fine white
bread.¹⁶ Then in the mornings, I have sour milk, water and bread. That is
my daily menu. Saturdays, when the milkman is off, I naturally have no milk,
just water. Sometimes I eat all of the bread in the mornings and have none
left for evenings. Milk here costs about thirty cents a gallon. Every day I buy
a half a gallon for fifteen cents. For a dime I can buy a loaf of bread which
costs more here than at home. I would have paid only a nickel for a loaf in
Germany.
I have not grown fat over here and now weigh only one hundred fifty-four
English pounds! One hundred twelve English pounds are equal to one
hundred German pounds. So, I weigh around one hundred forty German pounds. I
have not gotten a tan here because I work mostly indoors, but it would
make me very happy if I could have a ship’s broom¹⁷ sent to me. Yesterday, we
had a high of 95 degrees Fahrenheit; 212 Fahrenheit is equal to 100 degrees
Celsius. One can bear such heat only if one sweats. Nevertheless, I am able to
endure it, thank God, and with God’s help, I shall continue as long as I have
my health. In time, things will become easier for me.
Uncle Vincent’s family is the only Catholic family here. Every six weeks a
priest comes and holds a mass with Holy Water. When he is there, I
join the family in prayer. I want to see if I can’t find a German song for
Uncle Vincent to play on his organ. Could you send me a little German songbook
with notes? I know that it would thrill Uncle Vincent and the good priest to
hear a German song again. The priest is a German and is currently staying
with Uncle Vincent.
Well, I think I have written you just about everything for now. Please stay in
touch and let me hear from you again. Stay healthy and greet all
the family members and friends for me.
Your son,
Joseph Benedict.
PS
Anna has not yet written to me. It would make be very happy if she and Ernst
were to include a few lines with your next letter, especially if they
would like to know anything of me or America. By the way, Uncle Vincent has had
no farming operation on his lands for over thirty years. In fact, he has
no farmland at all in Texas.
Several things in this letter may be significant.  There is a hint that he was
having trouble learning English, and that not knowing
English was making things difficult for him. His lack of understanding English
was denying him his chance to do the bookkeeping
and accounting for which he was certainly qualified. Still, at this time he
made no mention of planning on attending school to learn
89
English. Of course, he mentioned the extreme Texas heat and tried to explain to
his mother just how hot it was in Texas. Finally,
the separation from his family did begin to wear a bit, for he asked that his
sister and kid brother write to him. Yet, he would not be
the first to write them. They must write to him first. It was a point on which
he insisted for a long time; as it turned out, it took
almost nine years for his brother to finally write. Finally, he continued to
write affectionately about Vincent, and it was obvious that
he remained in contact with him despite being in Dublin. That he wished to
please him was also indicated by asking his mother to
find some German songs to send so that he can give them to him. That his mother
would ask her daughter for money to buy a
German songbook to send to a cousin of the man who had given her the worst
years of her life was in itself remarkable. Finally,
Joseph appeared also to be startled that Vincent did not own any farmland. Was
it not land that everyone in America treasured? Was
it not the dream of every immigrant?
Whether Vincent knew that Henry was asking Joseph to work six days a week is
not known, but for some reason, after
about 14 weeks of this kind of work, Joseph was brought back to Hico and given
even a more backbreaking assignment. This time he
was taken to a railroad siding where a car piled high with coal awaited to be
unloaded. Joseph was handed a shovel and by motioning,
it was made clear to him that his task was to begin to unload it. No gloves
were provided, no instructions regarding pay, just motions
and directions given by the shake or tilt of a head or by motions of hands and
arms. Vincent could not have been unaware of this
time but apparently could not do much about it even if had known. Now Joseph
was expected to work seven days a week! There
were still no invitations to Sunday dinners at Vincent’s home; neither was he
asked over for a cool glass of lemonade or invited to sit
outside in the evening simply to talk. Joseph was completely isolated from his
cousins by work save for an occasional opportunity to
be invited to visit, at Vincent’s invitation, with a visiting Catholic priest.
Worse, Joseph now was assigned to the night shift. It almost
appeared as if Vincent’s family was trying to force him to go away.  This was
not what Joseph had imagined working for Vincent
would be like, but Joseph had no intention of allowing Vincent’s children to
drive him away from Vincent. By August, after some
four months in America, Joseph finally permitted himself to write home about
his true situation, and for the first time he wrote on
paper of one of Vincent’s businesses. He wrote on the front and back of a daily
sales report form for the Hico Roller Mills.
RETAIL DEPARTMENT DAILY SALES REPORT____________________________________191____
HICO ROLLER MILLS
Hico, Texas, August 4, 1914
Dear Mother,
I hope that my last letter has found you well and safe. Since you have last
heard from me, I must tell you that my life has changed dramatically.
As of the past four weeks, I have been promoted to night watchman. In America,
one can become anything. I would have never thought that one day I would
also become a night watchman!
My earnings are now around forty dollars or about one hundred sixty German
Marks per month.¹⁸ My current assignment as a night watchman
is to unload two to four coal rail cars a month. The coal is used to feed the
ovens for the boilers, which change the water into steam for the mill. They
have to
be attended every half hour all night long. The only regrettable thing is,
however, is that I do not even get Sundays off. Eating, drinking, working, and
sleeping are all I do. Day after day, I have only water to drink. I have gone
many days in which I have had nothing to eat. The only happy thing is that
here  in Hico, I am my own boss. No one tells me what to do as I am all alone
in cleaning up the trash, which those wonderful American women have a
preference to leave behind, just to irritate me.¹⁹ Of that, I am becoming very
tired and annoyed. Last week I ran a fever for two days. It came upon me so
suddenly that I had to quit work in the middle of the night, but Uncle Vincent
came and took care of me.
Now, this is what I think about the situation in which you now find yourself in
Germany. It appears that you will find Germany in war soon,
and then you will very likely find that you will have no work. I want to give
you some very good advice at this time, and that is to go to the bank
immediately
and draw out all of your money. Leave town and head for the country. Go to
Brigitta Buhl²⁰ as quickly as you can. There on the farm you will be safe. I
cannot return to help you and will not be there to take care of you, nor should
you have to worry about me. At this time my one hundred forty Marks that I
earn a month is not enough to survive if I find myself caught in a middle of a
war. The important thing for you to understand is that during this war you
could stand to lose everything, including the shirt off your back.
Well, I have not much else to report. Please write again and let me know how
you are doing. Do you need money? Keep healthy and fit, and
watch out that the war does not catch you off guard. Take your money out of the
bank as quickly as possible before it is too late!
Your beloved son greets you all,
Josef Benedict
First of all, it is absolutely amazing that Joseph would write to his mother to
suggest that as the war progressed to her area
that she would be unable to find work. Had he not understood what Anna had done
since moving her mother and brother to
Tuttlingen? Had he not understood that their mother was reduced to such a state
that on many days, she was simple unable to
function at home, much less try to find employment? Did he think she was
actually working? Furthermore, how much money did he
think that she had in the bank? It was almost as if Joseph had been kept
completely in the dark regarding the plight of his mother
and siblings following their father’s abandonment. Perhaps he was.
Joseph was constantly amazed as he observed the way Americans did things. He
began this letter commenting sarcastically
about his promotion. What good had all his studying and sacrifices done for him
only now to be awarded a position of night
90
watchman? The night watchman mentioned here was not about walking a beat all
night. This was a position that demanded heavy
manual labor all night long. Any failure to keep up the steam meant that part
of the plant would be forced to shut down. Joseph
could not allow that to happen on his watch. It was very hard work, but such
endurance now became a challenge to him. Let them
try to break me was certainly in his mind. He would show them.
Joseph had obviously become the butt of many jokes and snide comments made by
the family members and friends of
Vincent. Strangely, Vincent put no stop to it, but it is unknown if he was
aware of it. His daughters and their friends openly made
fun of Joseph and deliberately created more work for him. Joseph’s position in
Hico was equal to those assigned to clean out the
outhouses, a job normally given to Negroes. Perhaps many thought he could not
understand what they said about him, but he was
picking up more English, and it is likely that he did understand some of the
comments; the embitterment grew and festered for years.
How silly he would have appeared had he run to Vincent right away! Again,
Joseph planned a way to advance himself.
Of course, Joseph could not speak any English upon his arrival, but how was he
to learn when assigned day and night to
work that was normally given to the lowest workers? He slowly began to resent
Vincent’s sons and daughters even with more
intensity. He could not hold Vincent responsible, but perhaps he could make an
effort to visit with Vincent about improving his
situation. At least Vincent would understand his plight. Coming to America may
have been a huge mistake. If there was no chance
for a better life, he would have to realize that returning to Germany was an
option. How others left behind in Germany would think
about him would have to be dealt with at a later time. Meanwhile, he determined
he would tough it out, but at this time he could not
see how the work being assigned to him would help him in the long run. As he
lay so ill that he could not work, Uncle Vincent
defied his family and nursed him back to health.
Ill and exhausted, as Joseph lay in his cabin, he reflected on the life he had
had in Langenargen. After all, it had been a
much better existence.  There he had made some friends. There was a life after
a day’s work was done. There were hours of idle
chatter over a glass of beer, a game of cards, postcards to write, and weekend
hikes along mountain trails topped by breathtaking
views of a peaceful and seemingly tranquil world. Why had he given all this up?
His mother and sister were barely surviving. So
what! What could he have done about that? As he lay recuperating, he asked
Vincent about his chances. He asked about schools in
Texas. Both agreed that the answer lay in learning and mastering English. If he
were to succeed at anything in America, he needed to
master English. If he were to be of any value to Vincent’s companies, he needed
to know and understand the language of Americans.
Vincent now promised to help and gave him the money to enroll in a business
school in San Antonio. However, the money came
with a promise and a commitment. Vincent would help, but Joseph had to make it
happen. It was the last time Vincent could help,
for his family did not share his feelings toward Joseph.
Vincent was as kind as he ever had been to Joseph. He told Joseph that he would
provide him with enough funds to enroll
in a business school where he could study English in San Antonio while
improving his bookkeeping skills. With that stipend and the
money Joseph had managed to save, he also had enough money for school, books,
and room and board. Despite the shoddy
treatment he had received, it remained an option to return to work for Vincent
after completing his schooling. Joseph clearly
understood that he needed to have skills that Vincent and his companies
required. However, national events were moving much
faster that he could have suspected, and it would not be long before his
presence in the Hico area came more suspect as British and
French propaganda permeated American news stories. By October, however, with
Vincent’s help, he was safely enrolled in school in
San Antonio.
After six months of agonizing work for Vincent’s sons, Joseph was finally able
to get away. He had learned that Vincent
could not promise all that he had been led to believe he could. Vincent was
definitely controlled by his sons. They and their sisters
had disgraced themselves by their conduct toward Joseph. He would never forgive
them. Joseph tolerated their harsh conditions
until he finally fired back. There was no remorse in his leaving. What a great
disappointment it had been so far in coming to Texas!
Vincent simply could not deliver on all the promises made to Joseph. Had
Vincent just been an old senile gentleman who made
suggestions to Joseph while thinking that they would not be taken seriously?
Did he perhaps think that Joseph would not take him
up   on immigrating? A logical choice would have been for Joseph to return to
Germany. But, by the end of 1914, war had broken out
throughout all of Europe. He could not return to Germany and not just because
of the war, but because he was not yet successful.
He  had to prove to himself and his mother that he has made the right decision.
For many months throughout that first year in
America, it definitely appeared to have been the wrong decision.
But, Joseph survived that spring and summer, and in the fall, just as Vincent
had promised, he gave Joseph the funds to
enroll in a business school. He traveled to San Antonio by train, arriving at
the main Southern Pacific depot. He found a room at
411 ½ Commerce Street21 and enrolled in Mitchell’s Business College, where for
the next nine months, he learned to use proper
English and took additional courses in accounting. San Antonio was like no
other city in Texas that he had had a chance to see up to
this point. It was a city rich in history, and he found it very much to his
liking. The city was built around a central plaza, much like
those he had seen in Europe. It had a feeling of being a city where problems
were something that would be considered tomorrow.
He was not so much astonished at the large numbers of Mexicans, but was to
learn that there was an even larger ethnic group there:
Germans. His quarters consisted of a room only a block from the old town
square, the site of much of San Antonio’s history and
the center of much current activities, especially more on an intellectual
level.
Meanwhile, the war in Europe moved into its second month, and already there was
difficulty in sending and receiving letters
to Europe as Great Britain imposed its naval blockade around Germany to cut off
all access to Germany, even for neutral and
friendly countries such as the United States. Joseph, obviously, was concerned.
Receiving letters from home was always something
that he cherished. By fall he had grown ever more concerned about the safety of
his mother.
91
Joseph B. Wieser
411 1/2 East Commerce Street
San Antonio, Texas
October 12, 1914
Dear Mother,
It has now been over four months since I last received a letter from you. I had
so looked forward each day to a quick answer to my last letter, but I
now realize that that hope has been a wasted effort. Well, I do not even know
whether it is possible to correspond during such uncertain times.
How have you endured these first months of the war? I hope that none of you has
been harmed in any way. Here, we very seldom hear the truth.
The cables forwarded by the English to Americans are especially critical and
slanted just as those sent by the French. Both have obviously been censored
favorably toward themselves. What we hear is of the terrible deeds accredited
to the Germans. The image of Germany is so bad that real Germans can
hardly believe that those things are true. Were it not for letters from home,
it would be very difficult for me to know what has happened. I am just happy
that
the war appears to be taking place in France and thankful that no damage is
being inflicted upon you. I hope that a peaceful ending will be reached soon.
I am doing rather well. I left Hico on the first of October and will be in
school here in San Antonio for the next three months. It is costing me a
lot because living expenses are rather high here. I do not know any English.
Therefore, I am learning diligently and will hope to master English in three
months time.
Please try not to write Uncle Vincent too frequently if you write to him at
all. He is, after all, an old man, who made something of his life.
However, he is very much under the influences of his family members, and there
is not much more that he can do for me. Except for Uncle Vincent, the way
in which the family members look upon me, leads me to believe that they would
have preferred that I had never come to Hico. Well, come to think about it, I
feel that way now myself! My time there in Hico also became unbearable for me
after a while. One day I decided to let them have it, of course not for the real
reasons, for I felt it was right to tell them how I felt. One day I will make
amends for my behavior and apologize, but for now it serves me well to have let
them know what I thought of them.
That is all that I have to say about it for now and have no regrets as of yet.
I can still hold my head as high as ever. Please write again. I am
certain that in a few months you will not be able to receive word from me at
all. Some of my letters may simply get lost. Be sure to put on an additional
twenty Pfennig when you mail a letter to me.
Extend my greetings to the relatives.
J. Benedict
It had to be painful in writing and posting letters that Joseph could only hope
and pray that they might get through the
British blockade. When the war began in 1914 in Europe, the print media was the
only mass medium available to Americans. For
that reason, journals and newspapers of the period had a uniquely powerful role
in both driving and reflecting the attitudes of the
American public. When it came to shaping those attitudes, Germany fell behind
the European Allies almost before the Kaiser’s
legions crossed the Belgium and French borders. To start with, on August 5,
1914, just days before Joseph wrote this letter home,
Britain cut Germany’s transatlantic cable, thus ensuring that only their view
would enjoy nearly exclusive access to U. S. print media.22
Joseph could already sense this in the newspapers, and he wrote home about it
long before most Americans could see how the British
and French propaganda was influencing American sentiment. Additionally, it was
now amazing how quickly the British propaganda
machine had painted the Germans in such a negative light within months of the
outbreak of the war.
Of course, by invading neutral Belgium, Germany did nothing to help its own
efforts to justify its cause. In the first year of
the war, many American editors chose to adopt a neutral position, but of the
rest, the ones favoring the Triple Entente outnumbered
Germany’s supporters by five to one.23 When a German U-Boot sank the Lusitania
in May 1915, Joseph was still attending school in
San Antonio. Because of that city’s large German population, Joseph had some
cover, but Germany lost virtually any chance of
gaining widespread sympathy from Americans after that sinking. The German
government tried to respond as best it could against
the growing anti-German sentiment, but it proved to be an exercise in futility,
for there was not a clear channel available for its side
to be told.24
If the German Empire faced an uphill battle against American public opinion, so
too did Americans of German descent and
immigrants. During the election of 1916, Wilson’s Democrats even accused the
Republicans of being pro-German extremists.25
Joseph later told a story about what happened to the only other German living
in the Dublin area besides himself and that the
hostility he felt there was one of the reasons that he moved to Fredericksburg.
It was Joseph who was called upon more and more by
those who knew him to be German, obviously many directed to him from his
cousins in Hico and Dublin, to explain why Germany
was committing such atrocities.  Of course, many of these stories came from the
English wire services and were completely
fabricated. Strangely, Vincent and his family did not attract the attention
that Joseph attracted despite their German heritage. It
appeared that his uncle’s family had been in America long enough (since 1856)
that they were no longer considered as being German
immigrants. After two or three generations, German-Americans adopted mainstream
American customs, some of which they heavily
influenced; and they also switched their language to English. Vincent’s family
apparently was able to do it in a single generation.
Vincent and his wife had, after all, been born in Germany. Nevertheless, his
children looked upon their German cousin with distaste,
and he found himself deliberately excluded from what little access he had to
their inner circle.
After America entered the war, anti-German sentiment was extended even to the
teaching of the German language in
schools. Patriotic zealots condemned the mother tongue of many U.S. citizens as
a traitorous language. There were even worse
things to come. By 1918 the North American Review published that it was the
American duty to kill all Germans, to arouse the
92
millions of easygoing, complacent Americans, unctuously flattering themselves
that they were good Christians because they felt no
hate, to push Americans to a realization of what this war meant, not only to
them but also to their men, and to know that it was the
lives of their men against the lives of Germans.26 In German parochial schools
in 1917–18, after the United States’ entry into the war
on the side of the British, nearly all German language instruction ended in
most parts of the United States, as did most German
language church services. By 1914 only the older members were attending
German-language church services across the United States
while the younger members were attending English services.27 This would not be
true in Fredericksburg, however, until well past the
Second World War.  The local Lutheran church there was still offering a German
service at the time Joseph’s brother visited
Fredericksburg in 1955, and some services were still broadcast on radio.
During World War I, German-Americans, especially those born abroad, were
sometimes accused of being too sympathetic
to the German Empire. Teddy Roosevelt denounced "hyphenated Americanism" and
insisted that dual loyalties were impossible in
wartime.28 Meanwhile, a wave of hysteria began sweeping most of the United
States. Several thousand vocal opponents of the war
were imprisoned. Thousands of others were forced to buy war bonds to show their
loyalty. The Red Cross barred individuals with
German last names from joining in fear of sabotage. One man was hanged in
Illinois, apparently for no other reason than that he
appeared to be of German descent. The killers were found innocent of the crime,
and the hanging itself was called an act of
patriotism by the jury. A Minnesota minister was tarred and feathered when he
was overheard praying in German with a dying
woman. Some Germans during this time "Americanized" their names (e.g. Schmidt
to Smith, Müller to Miller) and limited their use
of the German language in public places. Newspapers printed blacklists of names
of Germans including their addresses, headlined as
German Enemy Aliens.29 Because Fredericksburg was more or less isolated from
the main centers of Texas, little, if any of this, was felt
there. No family there changed its name, and German continued to be spoken on
the streets, in the businesses and in schools
throughout the war.
In Chicago, a German-born musician temporarily stepped down as conductor of the
Chicago Symphony Orchestra until he
finalized his naturalization papers. Orchestras replaced music by Wagner with
Berlioz on programs. In Cincinnati, reaction to anti-
German sentiment during World War I caused the public library of Cincinnati to
withdraw all German books from its shelves.
German-named streets were renamed. For example, in Indianapolis, a street named
Germania Avenue was renamed Pershing Avenue
for a World War I general, ironically himself of German descent. In Iowa, the
1918 Babel Proclamation made speaking foreign
languages in public illegal. Nebraska banned instruction in any language except
English, but the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the ban
illegal in 1923, (Meyer v. Nebraska).30  It was rumored for decades that the
Texas Legislature allegedly passed a law outlawing the
speaking of any Germanic language. Ironically, if true, the legislature then
also had banned the speaking of English which belonged
to the Germanic family.31
Joseph’s room at 411 ½ East Commerce Street was just off Market Square, the
center of Old San Antonio, and around the
corner stood the San Fernando Cathedral in San Antonio, the site of some of the
most fascinating history of San Antonio since the
Spanish first settled in Texas. He could not have found any location closer to
the center of Texas history if he had camped at the
Alamo. Not having been schooled in the history of his newly adoptive state, he
had much to learn and appreciate. He became
especially fascinated with guns and eventually purchased a few antique weapons,
including old muzzle-loading guns, a Civil War
sword, and an 1860 Colt pistol. San Antonio remained steeped in its
Spanish-Mexican history, but by 1914 it also had a large
established German history as well.
The influential German newspaper, Freie Presse für Texas, was still being
printed some fifty years after its first edition in 1865.
It was one of many newspapers serving San Antonio and Texas during the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The number of
German newspapers had grown to 29 in 1907. Seven years after this peak, German
newspapers began to decline sharply. Eleven
papers would ease publication during World War I due to anti-German sentiments.
The last of the German newspapers, Neu-
Braunfelser Zeitung, ceased publication in German in the 1950s.32 Ironically,
Joseph’s youngest daughter, Bernice, when a journalism
major at Southwest Texas State Teachers College, spent her last summer there
working on the Neu-Braunfelser Zeitung to help publish
its 125th special edition in 1953.33 Meanwhile Joseph was enrolled in school
and living in San Antonio, Texas. He had written that he
would master English in three months. He did so with all his might and
determination for the next nine months. One text which
was purchased and which was required was Kimball’s Business English.34 It
opened with the following quote.
“You cannot hope to succeed as an amanuensis or hold a position of any
importance unless you are qualified to spell, punctuate and capitalize
correctly, and write the English language with a reasonable degree of
accuracy.” 35
It was a lesson that Joseph would not forget. The text was filled with frequent
notes made by Joseph as he completed and
practiced his assignments. Additionally, instructions were given for writing
letters in Section §94.2, which referred to stationary,
another point that was not lost on him, for he had already consistently begun
to use letterheads, whether they were others or his own.
“Only the best material should be used in writing a letter, principally for the
impression it makes on one’s
correspondent; for we judge people largely by the surroundings they choose and
the kind of tools they work with.” ³⁶
Joseph completed his studies in English and accounting in less than nine
months. He studied as hard as he had in Germany,
for he understood the reality of what his situation would be like should he
fail. It was his only way to get ahead. Joseph had thrown
himself into his studies. He did want to learn, for the lessons of not knowing
the language of his newly adopted country had so far
been a formidable one. He had always known the importance of having an
education. He had not yet had the opportunity to make it
work for him to his satisfaction. He did not wish to return to the manual labor
he had been forced to perform in Hico and Dublin.
93
He needed no other incentives. It appeared that somewhere the thought of Joseph
becoming a sales representative for Vincent had
very likely made that quite clear to him and what lay ahead of him should he
fail. However, it was difficult to concentrate on studying
when there was so much uncertainty regarding Germany. Had the war reached the
city where his mother and sister were living?
Were they safe? He might have left them with some indifference, but the
distance home had a way of creeping its way back into his
conscience. The war could reach Tuttlingen at any moment for all that he knew.
What little his sister could have provided for her
mother and brother could easily fall prey to enemy armies at any time.
November 3, 1914
Dear Mother,
I do not know if you have received my last letter, so I thought it best not to
wait, but to write to you again. I am currently without a job, but
perhaps I should say that I have had enough to keep me busy while I am
attending vocational classes. I am learning nothing but English at the moment,
which will sharpen by skills. I can hardly expect to become a sales
representative here without it. Working only with your hands is going to get
you nowhere.
The roles of such persons in this country are minimal.
The exchange rate between the dollar and the Mark has fallen drastically, and
the cost of living here is very expensive for a German. Every day
my expenses are about four Marks, but it is understandable that one has to
invest in learning if one is to get ahead. I know that one day it will all pay
for
itself.
Much Spanish is also spoken here. San Antonio was once closely tied to Mexico.
I would not be at all displeased to find employment here in San
Antonio. Of course, in that event I would also have to learn how to speak
Spanish. There is enough time for everyone to learn, and what one learns is
never
too difficult. I, of course, have a burning desire to learn everything and will
not let the lack of finances stand in the way.
And now, I must know how you are. I have not heard from you in quite some time,
and I am becoming quite worried about you. I do not know
how the situation in Europe is developing and can only guess that things are
also becoming difficult for you. Do you have work in Tuttlingen or are you
living
with Brigitte? Was Joseph (Buhl)37 drafted into the army?³⁸
It would be too risky to send money to Germany, and so I cannot help you at
this time. All I can do is to advise you to go to Brigitte’s if you have
not already done so. As I understand it, Germany has had a good harvest, and no
starvation is expected in the near future. I inquired about passage back
to Germany in September and discovered that to make such a trip would be very
difficult for me, if not impossible. The English have blockaded the entire
coastline. Well, I guess I had it coming. I can always come home anytime after
the war.³⁹ If you can, please write by sending your letters via Italy; it could
be helpful. Put at least twenty Pfennig stamps on them so that they will
arrive. My address in San Antonio is at 411 1/2 East Commerce Street.
With best wishes to you all, your son,
Joseph Benedict
Obvious that his situation had deteriorated to a low point in September 1914,
Joseph seriously contemplated returning to
Germany even if it was embroiled in a war with England and France.40 What did
Joseph hope to accomplish by returning? It had not
taken Joseph long to understand that working manual labor paid little
dividends. It was not that he was opposed to doing manual
tasks, for he would for the rest of his life choose to do physically hard tasks
such as building garages and adding rooms to a house,
mixing and pouring his own cement, and fixing fences, but he quickly realized
that he needed to be able to speak English and made
an effort to study and master the new language of his adoptive country. He also
studied Spanish apparently in a belief that it might
serve him well in Texas. Although he knew some Spanish, it was very clear to
him that he was living in a state where Spanish might
come in very handy. Later, when in Cuba on a sales mission, he quickly realized
that he did not know it as well as he had thought.
Nevertheless, without knowing English, he was of little use to his uncle in the
mill. Finally, to an even larger extent, he wanted to live
up to the expectations that his uncle might have of him even if Vincent could
not show much support for him in front of his family.
After all, it had been Vincent who encouraged his young cousin to come to
Texas. His children might have questioned the soundness
of his mind and his reasoning, but Joseph had every intention of proving his
worth. Finally, it was Vincent who had paid his passage
to come to Texas. If Joseph planned to repay his cousin, he needed to be able
to perform some useful task in Vincent’s enterprises.
Any letters after November 1914 either were never delivered or were lost. In
either case, Joseph stayed in school and
completed his studies by the spring of 1915. Rather than returning immediately
to work for one of Vincent’s companies, he sought
his hand at finding employment in San Antonio. The money Joseph had set aside
or had been funded by Vincent for school had
almost run out.  While he indicated that he used his own money, it is doubtful,
for he certainly would not have suffered the
humiliating work he performed in Dublin and Hico if he had had the money.
Still, he might have been able to save his meager
earnings until he had enough to enroll in school and enough for a room and
meals. More likely, it was Vincent that supplied him
with money, for after being unable to find employment due to competition, he
was again forced to ask Uncle Vincent for more
financial help. The rapport between Joseph and Vincent had not vanished, and
the fatherly interest that Vincent had taken in the
young Joseph continued. Now that Joseph had learned to speak and write English,
he had something to offer Vincent in return for
his help. Vincent remained the one person to whom he could turn and was
unashamed to ask for financial assistance once again.
Perhaps Vincent now realized that Joseph’s problem in not being able to find
work in San Antonio was not altogether Joseph’s fault.
He was now certainly qualified to fill any accounting or bookkeeping position
anywhere.  The problem now lay in events and
circumstances that were beyond his control. Joseph had already seen part of the
growing problem with Mexico as he landed in
Galveston. Now at San Antonio, he was a witness to it firsthand.
With the outbreak of revolution in northern Mexico in 1910, the same year that
Vincent returned to his boyhood home of
Volkertshausen, Germany, federal authorities and officials of the state of
Texas already had feared that the violence and disorder
94
might spill over into the Rio Grande Valley. Many valley residents either had
relatives living in areas of Mexico affected by
revolutionary activity or aided the various revolutionary factions in Mexico.
The revolution began to cause an influx of political
refugees and illegal immigrants into Texas, politicizing the Valley population
and disturbing the traditional politics of the region as far
inland as San Antonio. The influx of Mexicans has already made finding a job in
San Antonio difficult. He sensed that something
larger was happening. Some radical elements saw the Mexican Revolution as an
opportunity to bring about drastic political and
economic changes in South Texas as well. In a larger sense these were not that
far removed from some of the extreme talk he had
heard in Germany. The most extreme example of this in Texas was a movement
supporting the “Plan of San Diego,” a revolutionary
manifesto supposedly written and signed at the South Texas town of San Diego on
January 6, 1915.41 As revolution raged in their
homeland, Mexican exiles and their American cousins revived an old dream.
Article after article in some 230 Spanish-language
newspapers from California to Texas talked about taking back the territory lost
in the 1848 war with the gringos.42 According to the
plan, the revolution had been set to begin on February 20, 1915, less than a
full year after Joseph’s arrival at Galveston.43 News of its
discovery created a sensational outcry against Mexicans throughout Texas.
The framers of the “Plan of San Diego” were not ignorant peons, but persons of
some standing.44 Four Mexican anarchists,
led by a former customs officer named Basilio Ramos, had opened a cantina in
San Diego, Texas in the summer of 1914. Under the
very noses of the apathetic authorities, they attracted an audience for their
ideological harangues by passing out free drinks. The
agitators returned to Mexico in December 1914 where they celebrated the new
year in a Monterrey jail cell. Six days later, the five
anarchists and four sympathetic inmates signed a document titled “Plan of San
Diego, Texas.” The inflammatory manifesto called for
the armed liberation of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, Colorado, and California.
The Plan was a recipe for a race war that pitted
Mexicans, blacks, Indians and Japanese against Anglo-Americans. All white males
over the age of 16 were marked for death.45  The
goal was an independent republic, which might later seek annexation to
Mexico.46 Until such time, however, the liberated states
would be organized into an independent republic. It also called for a
no-quarter race war, with summary execution of all white males
captured over the age of sixteen.47 The authors of the plan obviously had not
studied American history, or they would have known
just how difficult it had been for Texas to attempt to withdraw from the United
States some fifty years earlier. Nevertheless, Texans,
in 1915, were very nervous about the approaching deadline set out in the plan,
and everyone, including Joseph, had to be aware of it.
The arrival of February 20, 1915 produced only another revolutionary manifesto
rather than the promised insurrection.
Similar to the original plan, this second Plan of San Diego emphasized the
“liberation” of the proletariat and focused on Texas, where a
“social republic” would be established to serve as a base for spreading the
revolution throughout the southwestern United States.
Indians were also to be enlisted in the cause. However, with no signs of
revolutionary activity, state and federal authorities dismissed
the plan as one more example of the revolutionary rhetoric that flourished
along the border.48  This was beginning to sound a lot like
those supporting the creation of a Marxist state. Joseph was not exactly
unfamiliar with such radical ideas, but it is doubtful that
Uncle Vincent was speaking much about this Mexican threat to his adopted state.
The struggle, to some, was over land. Tejano
landowners were rebelling against the strong-arm land seizures by Anglos that
were robbing them of their ranches. Between 1900 and
1910, some 187,000 acres had been taken from the Tejanos and transferred into
Anglo hands in just two Texas border counties.
Inspired in part by this Tejano-Anglo conflict, Tejano rebels launched their
Plan de San Diego. Roving bands of rebels began to burn
bridges, derail trains, and wreak havoc throughout the Rio Grande Valley.49 It
now appeared that the threat of war with Mexico was
very high and very, very real in the immediate years following Joseph’s
arrival.
The State of Texas responded as it had always done in a crisis by calling in
the Rangers. The Texas Legislature authorized
mass inductions into the creation of new Ranger companies. Not since 1846 had
Texas seen such mass inductions by so many
volunteers ready to be licensed to kill Mexicans wherever they might find them.
Some of the new companies upheld the law while
others functioned as vigilante groups and became even more incensed by raids
from Mexico. The vigilante nature and poor command
structure led to incidents unacceptable to “regular” Rangers. After one
retaliatory Ranger raid into Mexico, an entire company was
dismissed. In one battle in 1917, it is estimated that as many as twenty
Mexicans may have been killed by Rangers who crossed into
Mexico.50 It would become the nightmare scenario Rangers had anticipated.
Although 80 years had passed since that seminal border
battle, the Ranger crackdown evoked that old battle cry of the Texas Anglo:
Remember the Alamo!51      In response to regular
US troops on Mexican soil in Veracruz, President Carranza now demanded the
withdrawal of all US forces. President Wilson refused
to do so, and Carranza’s demand was summarily rejected. As a result, Mexican
raiding intensified along the Texas border and an
attack against Laredo was considered with a combined force of “San Diego
raiders” and regular Mexican Army soldiers.52 This
feeling of complacency was finally shattered in July 1915 with a series of
raids in the lower Rio Grande valley connected with the Plan
of San Diego. These raids were led by two adherents of Venustiano Carranza, the
president of Mexico, and leading residents of South
Texas. The bands used the guerilla tactics of disrupting transportation and
communication in the border area and of killing Anglos.
In response, the United States Army moved reinforcements into the area.53
It was a bad year to be Hispanic in Texas’s Rio Grande Valley. In 1915 a series
of escalating border-area skirmishes between
the Texas Rangers and Mexican cattle and horse rustlers, revolutionaries, and
innocents led to the deaths of an estimated 5,000
Latinos. Many were killed outright by the Rangers with zero provocation and
even less justification, their bodies left to rot where
they fell as a warning to others.54 Consequently, San Antonio, Texas, was
selected by leaders of the plan to serve as revolutionary
headquarters, and the movement’s leadership continued to come from South Texas.
Additional raids originated on both sides of the
Rio Grande, eventually assuming a pattern of guerilla warfare. Raids from the
Mexican side came from territory under the control of
President Carranza, whose officers were supporting the raiders. However, when
Woodrow Wilson finally recognized Carranza as
president of Mexico in October 1915, the raids co-incidentally came to an
abrupt halt.55 The evidence clearly indicated that the raids
in Texas were carried out by followers of President Carranza, who had
manipulated the movement in an effort to influence relations
with the United States. Fatalities directly linked to the raids were
surprisingly small; between July 1915 and July 1916, some thirty raids
into Texas produced only twenty-one American deaths, both civilian and
military.56 More destructive and disruptive was the near
95
race war that ensued in the wake of the plan as relations between the whites
and the Mexicans and Mexican Americans deteriorated in
1915 and even more so during 1916. Federal reports indicated that more than 300
Mexicans or Mexican Americans, a much smaller
number, were summarily executed in South Texas in the atmosphere generated by
the plan. Economic losses ran into the millions of
dollars, and virtually all residents of the lower Rio Grande valley suffered
some disruption in their lives from the raids. Moreover, the
plan’s legacy of racial antagonism endured long after the plan itself had been
forgotten.57 There were at least seventy-three border
raids along the Texas border in 1915, many in the name of the Plan of San
Diego. At least 35,000 residents of the lower Rio Grande
Valley relocated to avoid the raids and the revenge that had taken on a
distinctly racial nature.58  During a Ranger-led border
crackdown to root out so-called Mexican bandits and suspected sympathizers,
meaning anyone with a Spanish surname to some,
lawmen and vigilantes reportedly killed 5,000; thousands more abandoned their
ranches and fled to Mexico.59
It did not help put American and Texas fears to rest when, in January 1916,
Pancho Villa and his followers held up a train at
a station not far from Chihuahua. On the train, he found seventeen American
mining engineers returning to their work there. Villa’s
men shot and killed them all.60 Villa attacked Columbus, New Mexico a year
later in March 1916. The United States responded that
time by sending a large military force under Gen. John J. Pershing into
northern Mexico in pursuit of Villa.61   Sadly, that is what is
most remembered about this period. Meanwhile, World War I attracted Mexicans to
the United States, for the war created a massive
need for Americans to serve in the armed forces and the fledgling defense
industries. This, in turn, created a large demand for labor in
more traditional areas. Immigrants fleeing the Mexican Revolution quickly moved
into many of the lower paying jobs in mining,
railroad building, and commercial agriculture. Many came with the intention of
working, saving their earnings, and returning to
Mexico after the revolution.62 Joseph could see that in his estimation, they
had fully captured one fourth of the labor market in San
Antonio. However, there was no accurate count of the Mexican immigrants who
crossed the border before the establishment of the
U. S. Border Patrol in 1924. There was simply nothing in place to control entry
from Mexico.63 A century later the problem only
seems to have gotten worse. Additionally, the difficulties that Joseph incurred
in finding a job even after mastering his accounting
and Spanish courses clearly proved unhelpful. He sent his warnings on to his
brother, Ernst, through either his mother or sister.
Ernst was just 14 at that time. Joseph was doing his best to make Ernst
understand that an education was a foremost requirement for
success.
Meanwhile, Joseph finished his studies.  He had mastered English and turned his
thoughts to setting out on his own.
Perhaps he would not go back to Hico. If he could find work in San Antonio, he
would stay there. He would show Vincent’s
doubting brood that he did not need their father’s assistance any longer.
Consequently, as he finished his schooling, he began to
search for employment. Finding work, however, was now an entirely another
matter. He had competition, not only from whites, but
from the flood of refugees from South Texas and Mexico. San Antonio was
becoming home to many fleeing the year of revolution
south of the border.
April 15, 1915
Dear Mother,
I received your last letter recently along with the newspapers that you sent.
These I shall shortly forward on to Uncle Vincent in Hico. I am now
finished with my English and Spanish courses and for the past two weeks have
been looking for employment. Despite all my efforts, I have been unable to
locate anything as of yet. In this city, it is especially difficult to find an
office position since the requirements are so different. It is not like in
Germany where
only qualified and trained persons are hired for certain positions.  Here every
poor farm boy, who drifts into town finds work because he is willing to work
for nearly starving wages. Yet, that is how they work themselves into better
and better paying positions in the course of time.
Additionally, in winter this city swarms with countless half-sick and three
quarters-sick people stricken with TB, who are here seeking an escape to
a milder winter and are looking for a little work to supplement their expenses
while they are here. Furthermore, there is the war in Mexico. You must not
think that the struggles you are facing in Europe are not felt here. One can
certainly not find a single town in the United States in which the events of the
war  in Europe are not discussed.
Additionally, there is also the problem that the United States faces with
Mexico, the border of which is only about one hundred fifty miles from
here and where events of the war in Europe play themselves out along that
border. (Take Poncho Villa, for example.) The merchants of Mexico have for all
practical purposes broken off all contacts and trade with the United States.
This is especially hard on a neighboring state to Mexico such as Texas. There
are many businesses which employ up to twenty-five per cent Mexicans and are in
dire straits because of the conflict.
Well, it is not particularly a rosy picture for me either here. I am just glad
that I brought enough money from home to allow me to survive another
four or five months. Certainly, within that time, I should find work, which
will improve my situation. Whoever comes over here without money finds himself
in a very difficult position to gain employment, especially as a sales
representatives. I probably will be forced to write to Uncle Vincent once again
for some
financial assistance. Perhaps he can help me find work back at one of his
mills. I do not have to tell him that I regret having to ask for help again, but
necessity can drive one to ask for assistance. For one to be too proud to ask
does not necessarily lead to success. Finally, one cannot expect to make it here
after being beaten daily at his efforts to find work. Many times the odds are
against one simply because those positions which do pay well are handed out
under the table.
Give my greetings to Brigitte Buhl and her household. In case Ernst ever makes
the decision to expand his selection of courses, perhaps he could
add the study of another language. It certainly would do him no harm.
Joseph
Joseph wrote more openly about problems in Texas that he had before. Certainly,
the problems between the United States
and Mexico were of a serious nature, but it was a rare departure to write about
the American labor market. It was different from that
which he had known in Germany. Here, as he wrote previously, anyone can become
anything. That simply was not true in Germany.
96
Now trained in bookkeeping and possessing an American certification in
accounting, he expected his studies to be honored. They
weren’t. He now faced competition from a flood of migrants into Texas from both
other states and Mexico. He resented that
unskilled labor was preferred as they could be hired at much lower wages.  That
would not have been allowed in Germany.
Additionally, the market was being flooded with other kinds of immigrants: the
sick from other American states.
As Joseph finished his schooling that spring, heavy rains and flooding doused
San Antonio. These rains had followed one
of the hottest and driest years in Texas history and now deposited almost 7
inches at San Antonio on April 18th. April 1915 ended
up as the wettest April on record for San Antonio, with 11.64 inches of rain
for the month and the 11th all time wettest month on
record.64 Joseph could not help but wonder what kind of weather would greet him
next. The wet climate was not particularly good
for San Antonio. The city had attracted people seeking climactic cures from
diseases such as tuberculosis. They had migrated to the
American West starting in the 19th century, seeking a dryer climate. Local
officials, interested in promoting urban growth, had
capitalized on this phenomenon by aggressively advertising for health seekers
to come to this dry area.65 However, the temporary
floods and torrents of rain that deluged San Antonio that April did not seem to
discourage them, and they continued to flow into the
city, helping it to remain the largest city in Texas, well ahead of Dallas,
Houston, and Fort Worth.
The first large Mexican migration north to the American Southwest had followed
the flight of the liberal exiles as thousands
of Mexican citizens began to flee the ravages of civil war and poverty in 1910
and sought refuge in the U. S., altering the character of
Texas significantly and other regions forever. The majority of these immigrants
were poor and illiterate, and they supplied cheap
labor in Southwestern industries and agriculture. They worked for very low
wages, performing unskilled labor.66 Joseph quickly
noticed that wages were much lower in San Antonio because of the oversupply of
these immigrants, who now themselves had not
anticipated the amount of anti-Mexican sentiment they found in the Southwest.
The mass migration would forever alter the makeup
of  San Antonio, where the ethnic background of most of its citizens had been
of German origin since the last decades of the 19th
century.
In San Antonio, social constructions of disease may have intersected with
political constructions of race and class to
produce pathological bodies and stigmatized places. Whether or not San Antonio
deliberately set out to attract those health seekers is
irrelevant here, for the fact was that people with tuberculosis were flooding
San Antonio as well as many other health resorts across
Texas early in the twentieth century.67 Even Joseph, a recent immigrant himself
and still not a citizen, could see the huge influx as he
certainly had witnessed those taking the “cure” in Germany.68  Many were coming
from other states as immigrants to Texas. He may
have been concerned about their impact on the health of others at a time when
the city officials were not, but the chances are that he
was more concerned how likely they were to flood the labor pool, driving down
his chances to find work at a decent wages.
Other San Antonio residents may not have noticed the injustices being produced
by a natural accumulation of unhealthy
people. The material results of these discursive strategies may have included
dilapidated housing, a lack of urban infrastructure, and
lack of health-care services for minorities and the poor. Most wanted the poor
with TB to be spatially isolated from others while
wealthier whites with TB were socially accepted and sought employment in the
workforce.69 These were the ones that Joseph
complained about. Incidentally, nearer to Fredericksburg, in Kerrville, 1,000
acres of a dude ranch named My Ranch was sold to a
group  of San Antonio investors, who converted the ranch into the Mountain Park
Sanatorium for patients with tuberculosis. In 1936
it was acquired by the state of Texas.70
71
Postcard purchased by Joseph in 1915 – San Antonio, Texas
Joseph did not seem to be upset here at the percentage of workers that appeared
to be Mexicans as much as he was
apparently in sympathy with the problems that certain businesses were having in
finding skilled workers. Of course, if a business
cannot find sufficient inventory, it cannot very well continue to hire workers,
and it was quite apparent that the unrest in Mexico was
having an impact on many merchants who depended on trade with Mexico. The
situation brewing with Mexico in 1914 was bad
when Joseph had arrived, but by spring of 1915, it had grown even worse and was
as much of a major concern to Texans as Joseph
had discovered it to be upon his arrival in Texas. He was not alone. The fear
of unrest was felt by all. Even Uncle Vincent
mentioned the problem briefly in his letter to Joseph’s parents. The events in
Mexico were far more interesting, and Joseph could not
97
have missed reading and feeling the effects of the conflict in Mexico as he
finished his schooling in San Antonio. No sooner had one
crisis faded when another seemed to flare itself into a major blaze in the
neighbor to the south.
In Mexico, Obregon and his troops had recently occupied the capital, forcing
Villa to flee to the surrounding countryside.
Villa and his forces were pursued and in a three-day battle in April 1915, he
lost a decisive battle. Villa then continued to retreat in
the coming days to the northern frontier of Mexico and ever closer to bringing
another twist to the war to Texas.72 On June 15,
President Wilson, unable to keep from meddling, called on the warring sides in
Mexico to negotiate and unify to form a stable
Mexico, but Carranza resented Wilson’s intervention declaration, as did most
Mexicans. His military victory against Villa brought
much support to him across much of Mexico.73
The plot in 1915 by former Mexican President Victoriano Huerta and Germany to
seize America’s border states had failed.74
Incidents such as these also fed an anti-German feeling throughout the United
States. President Wilson felt forced to become more
involved in the Mexican Revolution after Mexican raiders, including Pancho
Villa and his followers, crossed the border to steal
livestock, attack towns, and kill Americans. General John Pershing was sent
with forces into Mexico to track down Villa. Villa
consistently dodged U. S. forces until Pershing gave up and withdrew. Wilson’s
invasion had intensified anti-American feelings
throughout Mexico.75
Those who fled the revolution were different from the Old Spanish and
Mexican-Americans whose families had lived in the
Southwest for generations, especially those Tejanos76 who had fought alongside
the Texians77 in their fight against Santa Anna. The
new arrivals were simply not welcomed by either group, but immigrants quickly
saturated the Southwest, and the San Antonio job
market at the beginning of the second decade of the 20th century disintegrated.
Those who could not find jobs in Texas began
migrating northward, eventually dispersing throughout the United States. Many
settled into agricultural jobs where they were a source
of cheap labor. It was estimated that ten percent of Mexico’s total population
immigrated to America during the revolution.78
In 1915 Mexico also elected a new government and president, Venustiano
Carranza. But, Carranza had one remaining
major opponent, a bandit-turned revolutionary named Francisco “Pancho” Villa.
President Wilson’s recognition of Carranza’s
constitutional government created an enemy in “Pancho” Villa. That upset him
and others. In October, Villa’s bandits crossed into
the  United States and lassoed railroad tracks six miles north of Brownsville,
splitting them apart, and then they waited until an
approaching train derailed. The engineer was killed in the crash, clearing the
way for the bandits to climb quickly aboard the train,
where they robbed the passengers and shot two dead.79 This bold attack, deep
inside Texas, sparked fear in whites throughout the
Valley. It was just another phase in what appeared to have become a never
ending series of events.
Meanwhile, 1916 had brought the United States and Mexico no closer to a
resolution. Relations turned sour again amid
growing violence along the border. The United States had responded to the
attacks on Columbus, New Mexico by sending a large
military force under Gen. John J. Pershing into northern Mexico in pursuit of
Villa.80 He never found him, however. The United
States flatly rejected Carranza’s demands to withdraw Pershing’s troops, and a
fear of a military conflict between the United States
and Mexico continued grow. In May 1916, there was a renewal of raiding under
the Plan of San Diego. Mexican officials now
considered the possibility of combining the San Diego raiders with regular
Mexican forces in an attack on Laredo. By late June 1916,
Mexican and United States officials finally agreed to a peaceful settlement of
differences, and raids under the Plan of San Diego finally
came to a halt.81
Despite Joseph’s improved circumstances he did not feel his position was good
enough to write home about, at least not yet. He had
resolved to maintain his silence until he felt he had achieved some sort of
success in America. Was it the success of Vincent that now
held Joseph back to even mentioning his first concrete accomplishments? Vincent
very likely had not had achieved his success and
made his fortune overnight either in a scant two years. Vincent had even
relocated after three and a half decades of farming and
milling flour in another state. Whether he had arrived with his family in Texas
loaded with capital that allowed him to invest heavily
in mills in Central Texas is not known, but what is apparent is that Vincent
made the vast bulk of his fortune after relocating to
Texas. It had impressed Joseph when he had first had the opportunity to meet
him in 1910, and even after the humiliating manner in
which Vincent’s family had treated him, he still admired what Vincent had done
for him. Vincent had been there when Joseph
needed help. Vincent gave him money for schooling and very likely encouraged
Joseph to continue to advance himself. Even if the
successes that Joseph had thus far accomplished were felt by him to be of no
importance, they were steps towards a better future, and
Joseph should have shared these small steps with his mother. He chose not to,
however, and the months of an absence of letters
caused his mother to do the unthinkable. She wrote to Vincent herself. It
resulted in a quick rebuke from her son.
THE TEXAS COMPANY
Joseph B. Wieser
Dublin, Texas
Sept. 19, 1915
Dear Mother, Brother and Sister,
To begin with, I was just informed that Uncle Vincent in Hico has received a
letter from you. How very nice of you to inquire about my well-
being, but I would have preferred that you would not have written to him at
all! Did I not make it quite clear to you that I did not want to write you
anymore until I had found a better position? My silence should have said it
all. From month to month, I had hoped to write you of some good news, but the
golden rays of the sun have not yet shone upon me here in America. Many
qualified persons are seeking jobs, and it appears that fate has finally tied
my
98
hands. Since May of this year, I am back working at the mill and back at the
same position as I had before I left for San Antonio. I earn one and one half
dollars a day, just enough to keep my head above the water, thank God!⁸²
Therefore, for now I can remain quite content working day after day at the mill
until the climate once more offers me an opportunity to move on. I am working
at a mill belonging to one of his sons, some twenty-eight miles from Hico and
about seven to eight hours from Hico.⁸³ Vincent’s sons appear to keep their
distance from me and view me as nothing more than as a common laborer. I had
once hoped that I would succeed and secure a better position with them. Now it
appears that in about six months to a year, I shall have to make a fresh start
elsewhere and hopefully will be successful this time.
I am never bored even though I have few friends with whom I am able to
socialize. However, I have much to do in the evenings if I am not too
tired. I usually work until ten o’clock each evening. Even Sundays I work all
day, read newspapers between doing hours of accounting for the company, and
in order to be successful in the future, I study my English and Spanish. I have
subscribed to an English and a Spanish newspaper in which I lose track of
time as I read every article.⁸⁴ Many times, I have been amazed how quickly the
last year and a half has passed.
I have grown quite indifferent with those who constantly bring up Germany to me
and who attempt to arouse my anger. I can now say that the
European war is of little interest to me. I cannot comprehend what drives those
who have no other purpose save to irritate me over world events that are
beyond   my control. My whole conscientiousness is driven toward that end that
one can better himself and be the master of his own destiny. The situation
among the family here now is much more unfriendlier than before, and there is
very little compassion to be found among them for anyone from Germany, even
a cousin. The reality of the war with Germany has made it very unlikely that I
shall be successful in finding a good position anytime in the near future.
I regret to have to inform you that Uncle Vincent is dying. He has heart
problems and cancer of the stomach. It is the very same thing Max
Schädler died from except that Uncle Vincent’s stomach cancer is growing at the
other end of his stomach. Day after day, he is getting weaker, and the end
does not appear to be far off. He is, after all, 78 years old. With his death,
I shall lose my one and only friend in America. I came over to Hico last
Thursday to visit him. I felt really sorry for him, for he appeared to be quite
uneasy and as helpless in dealing with his family as I am.
I hope this letter finds you all well. I was quite happy to learn that the
shops in Tuttlingen are still open, but also quite sad to say that at this
time, I cannot help you because there is no direct shipping to Germany any
more. My feelings are, however, that one day the sun will once again shine again
for you. Greet everyone for me and keep sending the newspapers!
Josef Benedikt
The relationship between Joseph and Vincent’s sons and daughters definitely
appeared to be more strained than ever.
Joseph was slowly permitted to begin working as a bookkeeper since his return
from San Antonio, but not before being sent back to
Dublin, where he now was assigned to assist Henry, one of Vincent’s son who ran
a mill there. His English was becoming more
proficient each day as he continued to study to improve his command of it, and
he was no longer doing manual labor such as
unloading coal cars or cleaning outhouses. He has begun to work his way up, but
still he was not part of the family, for the jealousy
far outweighed any ties that ordinary families might feel towards relatives.
Vincent’s family kept their distance from him as if he were
the enemy. The British and French propaganda appeared to have succeeded even
reaching deep into the heart of Texas as more and
more Texans turned on those identified as being Germans. He feared that once
Vincent died, he might be asked to leave. There was
nothing he could say that would convince them to believe otherwise if that
situation were to arise. An exit from Dublin and Hico
might have been only a matter of time.
The next six months found Joseph quietly working and growing more determined
than ever in planning and being the
master of his future. Vincent grew weaker by the week, and it was becoming very
clear to everyone that his days were numbered.
The next time Joseph wrote home he was clearly in a very reflective mood. It
was a rare occasion for Joseph to bare his soul and is
one of the most insightful letters he ever wrote. After scolding his mother for
caring about him, he now reveals his most admirable
attributes for her. No other letter would again reveal such a depth of
compassion as the following letter does.
November 14, 1915
99
November 14, 1915
Dear Mother,
Today it has just been exactly twenty-seven years since my eyes first saw the
light of day. Twenty-seven years! What a short stretch of time! So
noble I was, yet so apprehensive. I want to take this opportunity today to
bring you a little happiness and to share with you that after a long mistaken
path,
I have finally have a hold on my own destiny once again.
It has now been almost six weeks since I secured a job here in Hamilton as an
accountant, regrettable at a miserable salary of only fifty-five dollars
(about 220 DM) per month.⁸⁵ For such a responsible position, it is a very poor
salary. The position which I have, however, has enough work to keep me
very busy. I have a little of everything to do and with the harvest season in
full swing, it means I have to work every evening as well.
As you can see from this letterhead, I work for a mill which belongs to Henry,
one of the sons of Uncle Vincent. He acts like a real Jew and is a
miser to boot!⁸⁶ Well, this does not really bother me because I am not tied to
him, and I think that after a year or so, I shall wipe his dust from my shoes
and
leave. I think by that time I shall have improved my position to such a stature
that I shall be able to get a job elsewhere. My immediate boss, a Wieser and
a nephew to Vincent, is a good man. Still, he is to be pitied because he is one
of so many poor Americans here who does not have enough sense to get in out of
the rain. Many times throughout each day, I have to hold by tongue not to let
him know that I, as his bookkeeper, know more about the running of his
businesses than he does. Now, that I think of it, my position here is much like
being the owner of this business. I look back at what it cost me in pain and
hard work to come this far and to achieve what I have always believed to be my
goal. After all, I started out as a cow herder and arrived here lost in a new
world. Even though I do not pray as often as I used to on the rosary, I do not
want to change those things that made me what I am.
That young, thoughtful, shy Joseph must have appeared very anxious to the
entire world on that day twenty-seven years ago. Today he is nearly the
master of three languages and possesses a keen understanding of several
geographical regions. He carries his head held high as possible despite being
penniless.
The world stands like an open door to those who want to work. I want to speak
out to thank my mother for planting in me that desire to achieve and for
giving me a head and body with which to accomplish success. My dear Mother, the
work ethic which you exhibited in your working days has been passed on
to me.
I live here mostly without friends and surrounded only with the work which I
need to learn. Every evening I work a little for myself. Every
Sunday I work all day long, for there is no church here for Catholics. I make
no excuses for keeping myself away from the other family members. There is
always work in which I can bury myself. Nevertheless, I am doing well; neither
toothache nor headaches are in my way. I am not fat, but muscular, and it is
not difficult for me to lift a hundred pounds from the floor three or four
times into the air. That is something for Ernst to try, who it appears
certainly thinks
of himself as a junior Hercules. With this I want to bring to an end this
personal side of things. Whether it goes well or bad for me, I will survive.
Despite
all of the hardships and misfortune than has fallen upon me since I have
arrived here in Texas, I am very happy as how it has turned out so far.
Now, how are things over there? There still appears to be no end in sight to
the war. It appears now to be a long, dreary story, and I wish that it
would quickly come to an end. Have any of your possessions been damaged? Is
there still work in Tuttlingen for you? How are things at Geri? Is Joseph
(Buhl) still at home?⁸⁷ Please write soon; if five pages does not cover
everything, make it ten pages. It has been almost a year since I have heard
from you.
Are all of you ok? Moreover, since it will probably be Christmas by the time
you receive these words from me, let me wish you all a very Happy and Merry
Christmas as far as circumstances there allow. When the candles are glowing
brightly on the Christmas tree this year and all of you are singing “Silent
Night,  Holy Night,” think that I too am there with you, if not in person, in
spirit. I am thankful that I have work to keep me busy during the approaching
holidays, for here there will be no Christmas for me this year. I am having a
hard time keeping the memories of my times in Germany from my mind during
this holiday season, for such thoughts often cause tears to roll down my
checks.
Uncle Vincent is now really sick. He has cancer of the stomach, which is
similar to that which Max Schädler had, except that his was at the
entrance to the stomach. The effect is the same in either case. Uncle Vincent
will slowly starve to death as Max Schädler did. What a life he has had! To
work, work, work, and then to starve to death. It hurts me to see him in this
state, but I do not say it for his benefit alone. I will lose my best and only
friend in this country. “Nada Mas” one says in Spanish and this means “enough
of this” or “nothing more”. Just wanted to give you an example of how
well one can say things in another language.
I am enclosing a short article taken out of the newspaper.
Best wishes to all,
Joseph Benedikt
PS   Did you receive my letter written about two months ago? I have not
received a reply. Please keep sending me the newspapers and any news which
you have about the fate of my comrades from school. Anna, you must learn
English! What is the muscle-bound Ernst doing? It would make me very happy
if he would just once let me hear something from him. Give him the following
that I have written here in English.
“It is a shame for a young man to stop with fifteen years to educate himself
and think to be properly fit for life by leaving public school. Only he who
rises
above the ordinary will come above the ordinary, and only knowledge is it what
makes a man wise.”
Bob
Joseph simply could not cease from being instructive to Ernst. Joseph has
experienced so much in the twelve years age
difference that separated them, but his efforts to help are obviously resented
by Ernst, for it is clear that Ernst has not yet written him
a single sentence. Joseph again did not help mend their rift by making fun of
Ernst’s commitment to staying physically fit. Joseph
simply was unable to be a brother to Ernst. He wanted to teach, to help but
simply did not know how. Every attempt enlisted
100
nothing but anger from Ernst. Here his poorly chosen verses in English did not
provide guidance but sent a stern warning to Ernst
that he needed to study hard and to be prepared to work hard if he were to be
successful at anything he had in mind. It was not what
Ernst wanted to hear. Joseph appeared to be mocking Ernst once again. Ernst had
suffered too much for too long under Joseph’s
constant teasing for him to forget those years of torment. Ernst did not write
to Joseph until he had no other options. That would
not happen for another six years. Joseph’s absence was not yet long enough to
bring them closer. At home, Ernst had just turned
fifteen with no word of congratulations or even a confirmation from his older
brother. As Ernst grew older, he faced a certain
possibility of being inducted into the army if the war in Europe continued.
That Joseph thought highly of his mother there can be no doubt. He certainly
had known how miserable her life with his
father had to been. Even if he had been sent away to school at the age of 12,
he had to have known. It was also certain that she gave
him much of the strength to persevere in difficult times: to plan, to improve
oneself, and to overcome tragedies. She may have been
the light that inspired him to seek an education and his only support of
encouragement all those years that he was off to school in
Radolfzell. Certainly he placed her on a high pedestal. To refer to her work,
however, implies that she had worked for others.
However, there is no evidence that she ever worked anywhere except on the
Buhlhof, on Wendelin’s small, postage-sized farm, and in
the Gasthaus zum Löwen. It was more likely that he admired her ability to
endure the harshness of Wendelin and to continue to do
the things expected of women in those days. After being taken to Tuttlingen,
she never worked anywhere but for herself and Anna.
Joseph longed to hear news of some of his friends, none of whom he had written
since leaving the Lake Constance area.
He feared for the lives of relatives and those with whom he might have served
in the reserves and asked for any news. Later, he
would say that he alone, from all of his school comrades, had survived the war.
That may be true, for no letter or postcard was found
in his collection dated later than 1913, about the time he sought employment in
Stuttgart. Had he not immigrated in 1914, he, too,
would most likely have perished in the slaughter taking place on the fields of
France. Sometime after the New Year, he finally
received a letter from home. It lifted his spirits, but it was becoming more
and more doubtful that any letters would get through the
British blockade, for even American ships now were being prevented from
reaching German ports. Because of the sporadic arrival of
letters, it was often necessary to repeat news that may have been written in
previous letters that became lost, intercepted, or simply
never arrived. Of course, Joseph had already shown a propensity to withhold
writing if miffed about something, but it was more
likely that only two letters made it through the blockade in 1916, and the
first carried the sad news of Vincent’s demise.
January 23, 1916
Dear Mother, Brother & Sister,
I have received your last letter written in December, but the newspapers did
not arrive with it. I was really happy to hear from you once again,
and I wish that all of you would take time to write me much more frequently.
Since I last wrote to you, I am no longer in Dublin.* I am now here in
Hamilton, where I am working as a bookkeeper. I have agreed to remain here for
a year or through April 1916 at a salary of seventy-five dollars a month.
Nonetheless, I have not saved very much, and now have less than when I started
here. When I do have a little, something comes along, and it is gone again,
but   it will change with time.
You knew, of course, that I was in San Antonio where I attended school for
almost a year. That cost me over a hundred dollars a month. Since
the first of this year, I am attending school again, studying American history.
The books have cost me over a hundred dollars, (420 Marks), and my
earnings up to that time were not that great. However, after three years of
this, I should be making around one hundred and fifty Dollars a month, and all
of
this will be repaid. One must know something about his profession if one is to
get ahead. Meanwhile, thank God I am well and hope this letter finds you the
same.
Uncle Vincent died on the thirteenth of January, just ten days ago, and was
buried a few days later. With his death, I, and you as well, have lost
a very dear friend. There just is not any other way to put that. If you have
the time, please say a rosary; he certainly deserved it for the courtesy and
efforts,
which he put out on my behalf. I was over in Hico when he was buried and knelt
at his casket and just cried. You can just imagine what he meant to me.
Consequently, I have pledged myself to conduct my life in his example and thus
to keep the memory of this one friend that I had here very much alive. I am
enclosing  a small flower for you from his casket. Keep it as a remembrance of
him and of me as well. From this moment on, I have no one on whom to rely
and must look only to myself for my future success. I have not a single friend
here and will seek none. I shall do my work and pay my debts, and when the
day is over, I will bury myself in my studies. There is truth in the quote,
“Work is the crown of life and brings satisfaction”.⁸⁸
I usually work Sunday mornings and in the afternoons, I put on my hiking pants
and wander over the hills, rocks, and valleys in order to refresh
the body and keep me strong. I often wish that I had the muscle-bound athlete
Ernst here with me so we could sing together in the fresh air or I could teach
him an old German song. I feel that I could be of great help to him. I could
teach him many things that have cost me plenty to learn for myself. However, I
am afraid that the cost would be too much for me at the moment to have him
here. To pay one hundred Marks for food and a place to stay is out of my reach
for now. Still, if he keeps himself fit, I hope to see him here one day.
I think that about sums up everything for today. Let me hear something from you
and extend my best greetings to all.
Yours from
J. B. Wieser
Joseph also included a short letter that he had written in English to test
Anna’s ability to understand English. He does his
best to encourage her to learn English. Perhaps he was thinking ahead to a day
when she could bring their mother to live in the
United States. If he was thinking that, he could simply have said so.
Unfortunately, these words of encouragement were likely not
101
well received as they were rather admonishing to her just as his few lines had
been to Ernst. Joseph was simply incapable of being
gentle in offering advice.
January 23, 1916
Dear Sister,
Are you learning English yet? I would like very much to see you advancing your
education. Remember, one has to improve oneself as much as
possible; you should believe me when I say that one feels very small when
coming out in the world with only a meager knowledge. Knowing another language
is
one of the surest ways to penetrate into the customs and habits of foreign
people. Study every day a little, and you will be surprised at the end of a
year to see
what continuous work can do, and believe me, the benefit and pleasure which is
derived more than pays for all the work such a study imposes. I can assure
you that it is only the beginning that is really hard, for once you start,
every coming hour brings sufficient pleasure to keep interest in the work
alive.
Sincerely yours,
Bobby
*Actually, his last letter had already been sent from Hamilton, Texas.
In the preceding November’s letter, Joseph wrote that his salary was just
fifty-five dollars.  He has been known to
exaggerate, but the seventy-five dollar salary was a significant difference and
a reasonable good salary for 1916.89 It begins a pattern
of boasting of the amount of his income, but he rarely sent any money home to
help Anna care for their mother or help support
Ernst. Additionally, within a month of writing this letter, he purchased sight
unseen from a local Hamilton resident, 40 acres of land
in the far West Texas county of Brewster for eighty dollars.  It was his first
investment in land. For him to have eighty dollars on
hand was in itself remarkable. He held the land for the next ten years
faithfully paying the taxes due each year until selling it in 1926
for $1,000.00. This was a good return on his investment and confirmed his
belief in buying and selling real estate.
September 15. 1916
LaSalle Extension University
Chicago, Illinois
At this moment it may be opportune to express a feeling of gratitude towards
you and your institution; I am fully aware that
for the recent success I am indebted to you primarily. Herewith I take
opportunity to inform you that I have resigned my position
with the Hamilton Mill and that I am to devote my time entirely to the study of
your course in law.
J. B. Wieser
The death of Vincent meant exactly what he wrote - that his only friend in
America was gone. True to his threat, Joseph
made no new friends that became as close as he was with Vincent. The bond that
he had with him was undoubtedly a strong one.
Even Vincent’s children could not break it when Vincent had made up his mind to
help him. Although Joseph made good
acquaintances thereafter and commanded respect from many, he never developed
the kind of relationship with others to a degree that
they  could be considered “friends.” He basically now trusted none of his
cousins and took steps to exit from the Dublin and Hico
area as soon as he had the means to do so. He finally decided how he would do
this. In Hamilton he met a young attorney named
Hervey Chesley, who was an attorney in practice with his father. He began the
study of law with Hervey Chesley, Sr.90 It was the
younger Chesley who proved to be the catalysis to his success.91 It was
possible at that time for an individual simply to work under
an attorney until one was ready to take the bar exam. No university degree was
necessary, but Joseph had saved his money and also
enrolled in the LaSalle Extension University’s Law Program out of Chicago.92 In
time, he amassed enough credits to be granted a
Bachelors of Law. Now he only needed to pass his bar exam, and he would be able
to practice law. Once admitted to the Texas Bar,
he could leave his cousins and begin a new life.
Another point to note about this letter was that again, he addressed a letter
to his brother and sister as well and even
included a second letter address directly to his sister. Of course, there was
nothing in the letter that pertained to Ernst. He remained
quite unrealistic in his thinking that he could gain Ernst’s trust. Although
the letter was addressed to include Ernst, he proceeded to
talk about him, not to him. Did Joseph think that Ernst appreciated being the
constant recipient of advice by a sibling who had only
taunted him? Why could he not have understood that the many years of teasing
had destroyed any chance of trust? For the present,
Ernst remained suspicious of a brother who had never shown any brotherly
affection before. Ernst made no effort to respond.
Likewise, Joseph tried to be helpful to his sister, Anna, but the tone of his
words to his little sister also were somewhat
condescending. It just seemed that instead of helping, he was putting her down.
It was difficult for someone to protest, to talk back;
however, Anna, unlike Ernst, had become a rather strong-willed individual.  It
was she who had made the decision to seek
employment in Tuttlingen rather than stay at the Gehrihof. It was she who would
move their mother to Tuttlingen to get her away
from the Gehrihof. It was she who had worked and provided food for her mother
and her brother from the day that their mother
had finally decided she had had enough of Wendelin and had gathered the courage
to leave Volkertshausen. Anna very likely had
long learned how Joseph had meant things to be. She did not feel as hurt by his
words as Ernst may have been, however, she may
102
have suffered his slights with a better insight into Joseph and understanding
him better than Ernst. As a touch of brotherly love,
Joseph signed her portion of his letter to her as “Bobby.”*
93
Joseph’s Bachelor of Laws Degree
Joseph’s job search in San Antonio had not gone well. Within weeks he returned
to Dublin, depressed and frustrated, to
resume employment with one of Vincent’s companies. Joseph obviously had
contacted Vincent to discuss his options. He wrote
home to his mother that he had returned to the same kind of backbreaking work
as before, but it also appeared that at this time, he
was given a position in accounting. That promotion gave him access for the
first time to see the financial end of Vincent’s empire,
but why it required him to work late into the evening remains a mystery. Also,
it was a position to which Vincent’s sons agreed only
reluctantly. Vincent had some authority left after all. At last Joseph was
doing work for which he had been trained, not only in
Germany, but also in Texas. He now showed his cousins that he was intelligent.
Best of all, he had also mastered English. Whether
his cousins thought that to be astonishing or remarkable is questionable, and
it may have been with great reluctance that they
consented to providing him with a position. Joseph had to have known that he
was not exactly being given a position with great
anticipation of expecting a satisfactory performance from him, and Joseph knew
that his new position was not being created by them,
but by Vincent.  With that clear understanding and after noting the difficulty
that Joseph had had in San Antonio in finding
employment, he set out to find employment elsewhere.
Why not just astonish everyone and offer his services to the United States
government? Consequently he completed the
following form, an application for an appointment shortly after returning to
Hamilton. It reveals much about his education and
places of employment and that he had begun to study law.
[FORM NO. 205a]
APPLICATION FOR APPOINTMENT
All questions must be fully answered in the applicant’s handwriting, and the
position applied for must be specifically stated, e.g. Consular
Agent, or Vice Consul, or clerk in an American Mission or Consulate]*
Date: August 14, 1916
I, the undersigned, hereby make application for appointment as:
Consulate & Clerk
1. (a) Name as usually signed:          J. B. Wieser
(b) Name in full:               Joseph Benedict Wieser
2. Permanent post-office address:        Hamilton, Texas
Box 523
3. Date of birth:                 November 14, 1888
4. Place of birth:                 Volkertshausen, Germany
5. Married or single:              Single
6. Immediate family, if any:          none
103
7.    Of  what  country  a  citizen  or  subject?
8. If a citizen of the United States, name of State of which you are a legal
resident and the length of legal residence
therein:
9. If a naturalized citizen, how and when was citizenship acquired?
Arrived at Galveston, Texas, March 14ᵗʰ 1914 – resided since then permanently
in Texas.  Application for
Citizenship filed April 22, 1915 at U. S. District Court San Antonio, Texas.
*Vice-consuls and consular agents may be appointed without examination; such
officers, however, are not eligible for promotion except upon the successful
passing of the
prescribed examination; no salary is provided for vice-consuls; the
compensation of consular agents is derived from fees and cannot, under the law,
exceed one thousand
dollars per annum.
10. Describe your present physical condition, and state whether you have any
physical defect or infirmity. (The right
is reserved to require the applicant to submit to a medical examination.)
Physical condition excellent – Defects none.
11. At what institutions educated? State time spent in each, and general
courses of study pursued; state degrees and
years when conferred: Real School – Radolfzell, Germany 6 years –   University
of  Tübingen  2  years  –
Commercial College: Kirchheim on the Tech 1 ½ years – ½ years San Antonio
Business College – San Antonio,
Texas.  At present Law Student of LaSalle Extension University.
12. What is your knowledge of foreign languages? Spanish and German – (both
fluent)
French – (preliminary knowledge.)
13. Are you a stenographer and typewriter?   Yes.
14. Were you ever in the public service of the United States, military, naval,
or civil, municipal, State, or national?
Name offices and period of service in each:
15. Did you resign voluntarily, or were you discharged from any of the
positions you have held?
16. Sate fully every kind of occupation you have followed, including when and
where you were employed; the
address of the different employers; the length of time employed by each; salary
paid in each instance, and the nature
of the work performed; whether you resigned or were discharged:
Bass & Keller – Langenargen a/B. Württ. Germany – 4 ½ years (Shipping clerk) –
1 year Correspondent -1 year -
Cashier 2 ½ years…
Hirsh & Lichter – Stuttgart, Württ. Germany – 1 ¼ years (Head Bookkeeper).
Reich Bros. – Kufstein, Austria – Representative for Tirol and North Italia –
J. F. Wieser & Co., Hico, Texas – General Office Help – 6 months following:
Attendance of Mitchell’s Business College – San Antonio – and completion of
studies in Spanish – 8 ½ months.
Entered employment of Dublin Mill and Elevator Co. Dublin, Texas, May 1, 1915,
transferred to brother-firm
Hamilton Mill & Elevator Co. Hamilton, Texas, September 28, 1915 – with which
firm I am still serving as cashier
and book-keeper.
(I beg to remark that upon special wish, I will promptly forward a letter of
recommendation from all my former
employers; also that I am inclined to resign my present position in order to
attend strictly to the study of American
Law & Procedure, which matter I have taken up on the 3ʳᵈ of January instant.
17. What is the lowest salary you would accept? Adequate for entrusted position
and designed locality.
18. Name the competent and responsible persons whose recommendations are
submitted herewith:
J.F. Wieser – President of Hico Roller Mills, Hico, Texas.
Emil Perry – Cashier, Hamilton National Bank
Mengers, Wm. – Editor Southern Messenger, San Antonio, Texas
Local Attachments Attached:
]A UA j|xáxÜ
(Signature of applicant.)
NOTE; - The moral character, integrity, good deportment, and ability of the
applicant and his qualification as set forth in this application must be
attested by competent and
reasonable persons. In order that due weight may be given these
recommendations, the persons who vouch for the applicant’s qualification as set
forth above should fully
state the facts which enable them to do so. The original of endorsements must
be filed with the application.
Joseph had done his part. He had sent his application for employment in the
service of the United States, and he included
one letter of recommendation, but the state department apparently never
followed up on seeking additional letters of
recommendations from those that Joseph had listed. The following recommendation
was from the manager of the Hamilton Light &
Power Company, one of the businesses owned by his cousins.
104
August 15, 1916
To whom it may concern:
This is to certify that Mr. J. B. Wieser has been in charge of the bookkeeping
and financial department of our firm for about a year, has proved
himself to be a diligent, conscientious, industrious, and punctual young man
with whose performance and behavior we have been satisfied in every respect.
He is an expert auditor and bookkeeper, versed in stenography and typewriter,
familiar with English, Spanish, and German correspondence; he
has shown himself always on the alert and concerned with the interest of the
business, and as his private conduct has been that of a perfect gentleman and
are
sure that he will “make good” in any work he agrees to undertake.
We understand that Mr. Wieser is actuated to give up his present position only
for the sake of his studies in American Law and Procedure which
work he as a La Salle student has undertaken several months ago, and we
sincerely wish that after completion of his course, he may reap the benefit he
deserves.
WAH/S
Respectfully yours,
Hamilton Light & Power Co.
W. A. Haynes, Manager
Meanwhile J.B. continued to inquire of Anna’s progress and seemed pleased to
learn that Anna was taking steps to further
her own education.
Dear Mother and Anna,
Date unknown
Well - Anna - I am happy to learn that you have saved some money and have
decided to get an education. At this time I do not know what to
suggest for you. I think that the war has brought about many changes, and it is
difficult for me to extend advice from this distance. What kind of things did
you have in mind?  Let me know what you are thinking, and I should be able to
tell you if I think it would be good for you. All I can say for now is to
follow your heart. In other words, do the work that you enjoy doing. Then you
will be happy at it. That is how it has been for me. I have always set goals
for everything that I do so that I would know when I have achieved them.
What is our “bundle of muscles” doing? Ernst has never written to me since I
have immigrated. Has he saved up his money for the trip? As I
have written before, when the war is over, he can come, but he must not have
any big expectations. It is a bleak country here - no beer - no sport halls -
nothing, but work from early mornings until late at night. He needs to
understand that in this country he can achieve something, but only if he
surpasses the
God-damned English and the lazy Americans. I just want to give you one example
as to what happened to one 18-year old, spoiled, grandson of uncle
Vincent recently. He was thrown out of the university and now sits at home and
doesn’t know what to do.
If Ernst has the will to learn, and not just from books, but a will to observe
and keep his eyes open, he should come by all means. He won’t be
able to earn much until he learns the language. I will support him until then
and take care of him. He will be able to learn a lot from me and of things that
I had to learn through hard work and at double the cost. I have big ambitions
for us in the future. If he has learned something, - if he has the will, -if he
wants to, and if he has become a man, we will begin to build something
together; if God wills it, we are going to see better days in the future.
Extend my greetings to the other houseguests, also to the Buhls and Gehri, and
especially to anyone who has an interest. May God bless you,
Mother, and everyone!
Your son
JBWieser*
*After signing his letters in various ways, Joseph, Benedict, or Bob, Joseph
now began to use the initials “J.B.” for the first time. It
became his name and most will know him only as that for the rest of his life.
December 7, 1916
Dear Mother, Brother & Sister,
I just recently received your beloved letter from October. It made be very
happy to have once again heard from you after such a long period of
silence. I am especially happy to learn that no harm has come to you, for I had
really been expecting the worst. What one hears and reads here is that the
civil population in Germany is starving. That Friedrich Buhl⁹⁴ was killed in
action is very sad. Please give our cousin, Anton Buhl, my sincerest
condolences
105
for the sacrifice that he has made for the fatherland. War is an evil and sad
for both sides. If there is ever to be peace, hard concessions are going to
have to
be made by everyone. May the good Lord soon bring peace to everyone!
You are right in writing that I have it better than all of my colleagues with
whom I grew up. However, America has not turned out to offer me all
the things that I had expected. At the present time, I am once again studying
and hope by July or August of next year (1917) to become an attorney. It
will then be back to work for me, and high time, because my savings will
probably just last me until then. Meanwhile, I am working as a volunteer at an
attorney’s office. There I study and read. The practical review will help me a
lot. It really is a shame that I have wasted so much time. For three years I
have already been in a foreign country and have nothing to show for it in
material wealth and in retrospect even less. While this is stressful to me, I
do know
that what I do not now have or am, I can still get and become. Thank God, I
still have my good health. The climate here has not been detrimental to me up
to now. I have not had need of any doctor for broken bones, typhoid, or
malaria. I have had almost a year now to study the remedies and whatever
problems
I have had here, I would also have had over there. Who knows what ailments I
already had there? My English is almost fluent now. I can read and write
Spanish very well and would like one day to travel to South America. And, if I
find the opportunity next year, I should like to begin to travel a bit.*
How is Monsignor Ernst? If the war continues to drag on, he certainly will soon
have to put on the uniform of the fatherland, won’t he? That is
the way it goes with all mothers everywhere. Let’s just hope that he will stay
safe. Anna, are you learning a little English? Ernst, if you have a little time,
study it as well. If all goes well, you all must come over here one day.
Naturally, you will bring Mamma along. If, however, all you know to speak is
German, you are going to have a difficult time understanding and being
understood by Americans. Say, has anyone heard from mother’s brother who
immigrated to the Canada? I recently wrote him a letter but got no response
from him; yet, my letter was not returned.
I believe that the dead should rest in peace. Forgive us for our debts as we
forgive those who trespass against us may be what they teach you in
church. Dear listeners, there are many bad things happening in the world. Here,
for example, a man can shoot another and run free. The earth will
continue to turn regardless of what has happened.
I will spend Christmas this year as I did last year with two old Germans who
are here. They are two lost German souls, whose only wish in life is
to make one more trip back to Germany before they die. I doubt that they will
ever live to see the day because they are already sixty-eight and seventy
respectively. They have also lived in the South so long that the climate will
certainly have a severe effect upon them should they return to Germany. However,
should they get the opportunity to make the trip, I will send them to see you,
or I may just come along.
Give my best to my teacher and tell him that his prophesy – “However the lad is
at the age of fourteen, so he shall be as a man at forty.”-has in
all probability been realized, and I now take it as an omen. With best wishes
to all, your son and brother,
Joseph Benedict
*President Wilson had not at this point issued his Executive Order banning all
“enemy aliens” from travelling.
The tragic news, of course, was that his cousin had fallen in battle. He knew
Friedrich well, for he was his mother’s nephew.
But, what could he have said or done from this side of the Atlantic but wish
that the war would soon be over, and all would come to
their senses. He had made an attempt to reach out to other relatives who were
in North America, in this case, a brother to his
mother, a Buhl, who had also left the Buhlhof and immigrated to Canada. He
received no response and did not bother to continue
this quest. Was he reaching out to relatives to replace Vincent or someone a
bit more loyal to family than he was experiencing from
Vincent’s family?
The reference to letting the dead rest in peace was directed in reply to
something that his mother had written about his
father. Wendelin was attempting to come back into the good graces of Maria,
just as he had done once before, when he had begun to
openly flaunt his infidelity at the Gastehaus zum Löwen. It had angered Joseph
beyond words when Maria took him back at that time.
Now she was being asked again, but first she wanted to hear what her oldest son
would have to say about that. Wendelin was at it
again, trying to weasel his way back into her life. Joseph was not kidding when
he considered his father as being dead. On his
application to the Department of State, made earlier in 1916, he had listed his
father as being deceased. In the mind of Joseph,
Wendelin was dead, and he wanted to keep it that way. It angered him to learn
that she could be so naive as to even consider for a
second the idea of permitting him back into her life.
If Joseph wrote again before December 1916, it is simply not known for there
were apparently only two letters that made it
through the blockade imposed by the British. It became quite effective in
severing all communication between neutral nations and
Germany. Ten months had passed before he heard from home again. The months of
uncertainty as to the fate of his mother and
siblings had to wear on him, but he had not asked one thing about the war in
his last letter. Now, he had grown anxious and wanted
to know more. He also has a lot to write home about what has happened to him in
the past year. Again, he addressed the letter to his
mother, sister, and brother but wrote as if asking about Ernst in one paragraph
and then writing to him directly in another. Still Ernst
refused to answer. Anna, too, refused to answer whether she was studying
English. Both may have been miffed at him. It was quite
likely that she felt the same way as Ernst about their older brother.
There was no correspondence with his mother and family for the next thirty-one
months. A lot happened during this time.
The war to end all wars finally came to an end in 1918, almost two years after
this letter was posted. Because the Allied blockade
remained enforced against the former German Reich in the continuation of
English blockade, no letters could be exchanged for
another eight months, leaving unknown the fate of his mother, sister, and
brother until well into 1919. Joseph continued to live in
fear of not knowing how his mother and family had fared. The waiting had to be
excruciating.
106
Joseph completed his course of study by correspondence and was awarded a
Bachelors of Laws, becoming the first in his
family to earn a college degree. He also passed the State Bar of
Texas and became an attorney licensed to practice anywhere in Texas. In other
words, he was now free to move wherever he wished.
Vincent was dead and with him all connections to Vincent’s family. Joseph
opened his first office in Hamilton but quickly closed it
as events in Central Texas turned ugly. He moved to Fredericksburg in July 1917
and qualified for citizenship in the United States in
1920. These were dramatic changes in anyone’s life. Vincent would have been
proud to know that he had not been wrong about the
young Joseph he had met on his pilgrimage home in 1910.
With the death of Vincent, as Joseph had written, he lost his only friend in
America. There was nothing to lose in moving
elsewhere to establish his practice. He had no ties with Vincent’s family worth
keeping. At least he was out of the sight of those who
had despised him, made fun of him, and looked down on him. However, apparently
not all contact with his cousins was completely
severed, and now, educated and fluent both in English and Spanish and armed
with a law degree, he obviously gained some respect
among his cousins, for he would later find himself in their employment again,
this time as a foreign sales representative. He had truly
come a long way from that day he stepped on shore at Galveston. Future letters
home were from now on written on his very own
stationary. He was on his way to becoming someone, and he was following to the
letter the lessons learned from his texts on business
and English.
Chapter V Footnotes
1 Photograph in possession of M. Wieser from a small photo album given to
Wendelin and Maria Wieser by Vincent during his trip to
Volkertshausen in 1910. In 2009 the album was found among the papers of
Lieselotte Ehrensperger and contains numerous
photograph of Vincent, his family, and scenes around Hico, Texas, especially of
the Wieser mills and retail stores owned by Vincent.
It had obviously been a gift Vincent brought to give to Wendelin and Maria
Wieser in Volkertshausen, Germany. Album is now in
the possession of Mark Wieser.
2 Ibid.
3 Lorenz, Gilliam, and Gullett Hafner – Fort Crockett and the occupation of
Veracruz, Mexico –
http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~katloregen/FtCrockett.htm -
accessed August 1, 2010.
4 The Mexican Revolution - http://www.fsmitha.com/h2/ch03mex.htm - accessed
September 12, 2008, hereafter referenced as The
Mexican Revolution.
5 Ibid.
6 Mexico Revolt 1914-1915 - http://www.onwar.com/aced/data/mike/mexico1914.htm
- accessed September 11, 2008, hereafter
referenced as Mexican Revolt 1914-1915.
7 The Mexican Revolution.
8 Ibid.
9 Time Line of the Mexican Revolution –
http://www.emersonkent.com/history/timelines/mexican_revolution_timeline_1915.ht
m
– accessed September 12, 2008.
10 Ibid
11 The Mexican Revolution.
12 Revolt in Mexico - 1914-1915.
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.
15 This page was numbered as II (page 2) by Joseph. Page I is missing and, if
addressed to another, to whom it was addressed is
unknown.
16 American white bread would prove to be a problem for Joseph his whole life
here. He hated it! Even in later years, if no other
bread was available, he would hold up a piece of sandwich bread between his
thumb and index finger waving it above the table and
call it nothing but a wash rag.
17 A ship’s broom is a sturdy one intended for cleaning the bottom of a ship
while it is still in the water. Obviously one that can
withstand extreme heavy use. Joseph apparently was thinking that if he had a
better kind of broom, it would make his task assigned
him  in Dublin somewhat easier. – William Hutchinson, “A Treatise of Practical
Seamanship.” - On Keeping a Clean Bottom. -
http://www.bruzelius.info/Nautica/Seamanship/Hutchinson(1777)_p171.html –
accessed October 2, 2011.
18 Forty dollars in 1914 would be approximately about $850.00 in 2008 dollars.
19 Those wonderful American women were very likely the daughters of Vincent and
their friends.
20 Brigitta Buhl, a sister of Maria, was married to a Breidner, and they lived
on the Gehrihof.
21 The address at 111 ½ Commerce Street in San Antonio no longer exists. It
obviously was at one time a boarding house of sorts
located only half a block east of the historic San Fernando Cathedral, site of
much of Texas’ history and which certainly became
Joseph’s refuge. Here he befriended L. William Menger, editor of the Catholic
periodical Southern Messenger whom Joseph will
use as a reference in applying for work at the state department.
22 BOOK REVIEW:World War I: Primary Documents on Events from 1914 to 1919.
http://warandgame.wordpress.com/2008/07/06/book-reviewworld-war-i-primary-docume
nts-on-events-from-1914-to-1919/ -
accessed September 10, 2008.
23 Ibid.
24 Ibid.
25 Ibid.
107
26 Ibid.
27 German American -
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German-American#Assimilation_and_World_War_I_anti-G
erman_sentiment
– accessed September 10, 2008. Hereafter referred as German American.
28 Ibid.
29 Ibid.
30 Ibid.
31 It was during World War I that the name for this family of languages was
changed from Indo-Germanic Languages to Indo-
European Languages.
32 German American.
33 Germans in San Antonio: Freie Presse fur Texas -
http://drtlibrary.wordpress.com/2008/10/31/germans-in-san-antonio-freie-
presse-fur-texas/trackback/ - accessed January 2, 2009.
34 Kimball’s Business English was published by the Bobbs-Merrill Company in
1908, with lessons on business letter writing,
capitalization, and punctuation; it was designed for use in commercial schools,
high schools, academies, normal schools, and higher
grades   of the common schools. It provided Joseph with the very basics for
learning English, and he apparently excelled. The
exercises in this book were all worked and are marked in Joseph’s handwriting.
He took his task of learning English very seriously. –
http://books.google.com/books?id=HLICAAAAYAAJ&printsec – accessed August 27,
2010. The textbook is in the collection of
M. Wieser.
35 Kimball, Gustavaus S., Kimball’s Business English, The Bobbs-Merrill
Company, Indianapolis: 1908, p. 1
36 Ibid. p.78.
37 Joseph Buhl - It is not known who this Joseph whom J.B. is inquiring about
is.
38 It is impossible to know whom Joseph is asking about here. It is more
probable that it was a cousin in the Buhl family as it is
unlikely that he would ask about any one on Wendelin’s side of the family. Or
perhaps he is asking about one of his schoolmates,
perhaps a Schädler; of course, the Schädlers were also related. Joseph will
later claim that all of his classmates in Volkertshausen
were killed during the Great War, making it, of course, quite fortunate that he
had immigrated. That claim, however, is rather
doubtful as he received a letter in the 1950s from a youth he knew from
Volkertshausen then living in California who claimed to have
been one of his schoolmates.
39 Joseph claimed he had saved enough money to go to school on his own and that
he was spending about $100 per month. This
would imply that Vincent supposedly did not assist him. That makes the
difficult times in Dublin understandable. Was he earning
money to save and to go to school? If he had had money, he would not have had
to stay and endure the hard work assigned to him.
Yet we know that Vincent stood ready to help him anytime he had asked. It is
far more likely that Vincent sponsored his education
in San Antonio. Additionally, that he now had inquired about booking passage
back to Germany is also difficult to believe, for it
would have been a major embarrassment to return so quickly. However, it could
also be that Uncle Vincent had misled him about
the opportunities awaiting him in Texas.
40 Although Joseph had completed his service in the 101st Bavarian Company by
1910, his return to Germany may have subjected him
to being recalled to active duty by the Kaiser. This sentence clearly is at
odds with a story that he related at dinners about his reasons
for immigrating to the United States. He claimed to have had endured enough of
militarism and chose to desert the Kaiser’s army. If
that were true, his returning to Germany would have subjected him to
prosecution for desertion. He clearly had served his time in
the reserves and was no longer subject to further training at the time of his
immigration.
41 Don M. Coerver - Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. ","
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/PP/ngp4.html
(accessed September 13, 2008). Hereafter referenced as Don M. Coever.
42 Our protracted war with Mexico – The Rising Tide of Color –by Lothrop
Stoddard –
http://vanishingamerican.blogspot.com/2007/10/our-protracted-war-with-mexico.htm
l - accessed September 14, 2008
43 Don M. Coever.
44 Our Protracted War with Mexico – The Rising Tide of Color –by Lothrop
Stoddard –
http://vanishingamerican.blogspot.com/2007/10/our-protracted-war-with-mexico.htm
l - accessed September 14, 2008. Hereafter referenced as
Our Protracted War with Mexico.
45 Liberty Post – The Rising Tide of Color –by Lothrop Stoddard –
http://vanishingamerican.blogspot.com/2007/10/our-protracted-war-with-
mexico.html - accessed September 14, 2008.
46 Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum -
http://www.texasranger.org/history/rangerHistory.htm - accessed September 13,
2008.
Herein after referenced as Texas Ranger Hall of Fame.
47 Don M. Coever.
48 Ibid.
49 The Texas Border Wall Can’t Separate Latinos From Their Memories and Culture
By Michelle García, The Washington Post.
Posted June 14, 2008. – http://www.alternet.org/immigration/87699/_?page=3 –
accessed September 14, 2008. Hereafter
referenced as Texas Border Wall.
50 Texas Ranger Hall of Fame.
51 Texas Border Wall.
52 Texas Ranger Hall of Fame.
53 Don M. Coever.
54 Wrong Place, Wrong Time – By Marc Salvoc – Kirby Warnock’s ‘Border Bandits’
raids the Alamo with the ugly truth of 1915
Texas – http://www.austinchronicle.com/gyrobase/Issue/story?oid=oid%3A240351 –
accessed September 14, 2008.
108
55 Don M. Coever.
56 Ibid.
57 Ibid.
58 http://blog.vdare.com/archives/2005/04/29/reconquista-meets-terminator/ -
accessed September 14. 2008.
59 Texas Border Wall.
60 The Mexican Revolution.
61 Don M. Coever.
62 Ibid.
63 Refugees of the Revolution.
64 http://www.srh.noaa.gov/ewx/html/wxevent/Climate_Narratives/aprclimate.htm -
accessed September 11, 2008.
65 http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6VH5-4H57TGW-
1&_user=10&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_acct=C000050221&_version=1
&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&
md5=54015bc321a23caeb6a2034ae9e3da64 – accessed September 11, 2008.
66 Refugees of the Revolution.
67 The Bexar County Tuberculosis Sanatorium opened in 1912 for an ever
increasing population afflicted by the disease. By 1926
the death rate for Hispanics in San Antonio was 343 per 100,000 or almost three
times higher than for Anglo-Caucasians. – Health
and Medicine - Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. ","
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/HH/smhzc.html -accessed
August 28, 2010.
68 Taking the cure is a term associated with water treatment. Towns with hot
springs were springing up in a number of places
throughout Texas at this time. The belief in the curative powers of mineral
waters goes back to prehistoric times and practices at this
time were popular almost everywhere. San Antonio was no exception.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spa - accessed August 27, 2010.
69 Kerrville State Hospital - Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. ","
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/KK/sbk1.html - accessed
September 11, 2008.
70 Ibid.
71 Postcard purchased by Joseph in 1915 while attending school in San Antonio.
Such a photograph as this of a typical Mexican
family living in San Antonio would today be consider offensive. – Postcard is
in the collection of M. Wieser, Fredericksburg.
72 Revolt in Mexico - 1914-1915.
73 The Mexican Revolution.
74 Refugees of the Revolution, America and Mexico: A Fluctuating Relationship –
http://74.125.95.104/search?q=cache:YpeFUHl8qBIJ:www.lcms.org/graphics/assets/me
dia/WRHC/Historical%2520Background.
doc+Mexican+work+force+1915+Texas&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=20&gl=us – accessed
September 13, 2008. Hereafter referenced as
Refugees of the Revolution.
75 Ibid.
76 Tejanos – The original Spanish term for a Texan of Mexican descent. -
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tejanos – accessed September 10,
2010.
77 Texians – The name for immigrants from the United States and countries other
than Mexico who became residents of Tejas and
Coahuila, a state in the Republic of Mexico. - en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texian –
accessed September 10, 2010.
78 Refugees of the Revolution.
79 Military: Mexican Expedition -
http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/mexican_expedition.htm - accessed
August 1, 2010.
80 Don M. Coever.
81 Ibid.
82 An hourly rate of $1.50 in 1915 was the equivalent to earning $32.07 in
2010. If Joseph worked a 10-hour day, he was earning
$3.21 an hour. The minimum wage in 2010 was $7.15 per hour. – Dollar Times -
http://www.dollartimes.com/calculators/inflation.htm - accessed September 10,
2010.
83 It is uncertain by what means of transportation Joseph may have been
referring. If one were a fast walker, one could walk this
distance in the 7 to 8 hours. By rail or by auto, the time would have been much
less.
84 Joseph would remain an active reader for the rest of his life. The fact that
he was reading every article indicates that he was well-
informed on current events affecting Texas and the United States. The situation
with Mexico, Mexicans, and the troubles along the
border, the influx of Mexican refuges into San Antonio, and the deteriorating
relations between the United States and Germany, for
only English and British wire lines were available to American newspapers,
meant that Joseph was well-informed of the events
around him and probably more informed than anyone else around him.
85 Fifty-five dollars per month is equal to a salary of $1,176.00 in 2010
dollars or about $14,000 annual salary.
86 This is one of the rare occasions that Joseph makes a disparaging reference
to Jews. I, for example, never heard him make such
remarks in the years that I knew him.
87 Gehri refers to the Gehrihof or farm owned by the husband of Brigitta Buhl,
a Breidner. Brigitta Buhl was the sister of Joseph’s
mother, Maria. The Joseph mentioned here could have been a Buhl or Schädler,
although that is not known for certain.
88 “Work is the crown of life and brings satisfaction” – The source of this
verse may come from John 4:36. Joseph a devout
Catholic at this time, might have sought some solace in this verse for the
difficult times he had experienced thus far in Texas.
89 Seventy-five dollars is equivalent to earning $1,604.00 in 2010 dollars.
90 Joseph began to study law under a Hamilton attorney named Hervey Chesley,
Sr. His son was Hervey Chesley, Jr., and he and
Joseph became close friends. His name would forever remain in the good graces
of Joseph, yet Mr. Chesley never made it to
109
Fredericksburg as far as is known. Joseph did make an effort to stop by to
visit him whenever passing through Hamilton as he did
even on his way to Arkansas in the 50s. He very likely held Chesley in a higher
regard than he admitted. Both men were about the
same age. Joseph used Chesely’s dad’s law library to learn enough law to pass
the Texas Bar. There was, at that time, a very good
chance that he was considering staying in Hamilton to practice law. Two things
changed that. The first was that Chesley enlisted in
the army as a captain and left to fight in the war. The second was the
unfavorable conditions arising in that area against Germans.
91 For more information on the Chesleys of Hamilton, Texas visit Flickr – Photo
Sharing! -
http://www.flickr.com/photos/38317803@N04/3557620364/ - accessed September 11,
2010.
92 La Salle Extension University (LSEU) was licensed to operate as an
institution of higher education and consisted of several
schools, including Business, Finance, Law, Science, and others. In its early
years, LSEU became one of only two schools in the United
States to be authorized by the National Home Study Council (NHSC) of the State
of Illinois to grant academic degrees for
completion  of distance study programs. The NHSC is recognized by the US
Department of Education as a national accrediting
agency.    La Salle Extension University voluntarily relinquished accreditation
of its law school program in 1980. La Salle Extension
University produced many alumni in the legal and insurance fields, as well as
state and local political administrations, and a spectrum
of   US military officials. La Salle Extension University -
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/La_Salle_Extension_University - accessed
January 3, 2009.
93 The degree earned by Joseph is on a sheepskin dated July 31, 1917 and is in
the possession of M. Wieser.
94 Friedrich Buhl was a first cousin to Joseph and his mother’s nephew. He was
the oldest son and in line to inherit the Buhlhof. As
a consequence of Friedrich’s death, the Buhlhof was inherited by the second
oldest son, Anton.
110
