---
layout: ../../layouts/Post.astro
title: Finding a German Oasis
subtitle: Chapter VI
---

German-speaking settlers immigrated to the United States for reasons
much like the Pilgrims. Religious dissenters from various German
principalities [^1] settled in Pennsylvania during the 1680s. Eleven decades
later the first American Census counted 375,000 Germans living in the
thirteen colonies. Immigration increased significantly during the
European Napoleonic Wars (1793--1815), and during the 1850s, almost a
million additional German immigrants arrived.[^2] The peak of German
immigration to America occurred in the 1880s when more than 1.4 million
Germans immigrated to America. Most were craftsmen and their families
who streamed into the booming, industrializing cities. Milwaukee,
Chicago, and Cincinnati held the highest proportion of German-Americans
in the late nineteenth century, although cities such as New York and
Philadelphia also had a high percentage by 1890. And, by 1900, Texas was
home to almost 200,000 ethnic Germans.[^3]
Germans often stood out from other immigrants because of their high
proportion of literacy, quantity of skilled workers, their penchant for
family migration, and their dispersal throughout the rural and urban
areas in the mid-Atlantic and mid-western states. [^4] However, those Germans
that settled in the South and Southwest have been largely overlooked by
historians, but their numbers were sizable nevertheless. The strong
family and ethical values they brought with them made it possible for
them to survive in areas sometimes hostile and often remote from more
populous settlements in Texas, much like those found in the Texas Hill
Country in the 1840s.

The German-American community reflected the diversity of Germany in a
number of ways: Catholics were a slight majority, and Lutherans were a
significant minority.[^5] Many who left Volkertshausen, even before
Vincent's family decided to immigrate, settled in the northern states
and did not choose Texas as their destination. Texas had barely been
admitted to the United States at the time Vincent's family decided to
immigrate, so immigration there was not even an option. Vincent's father
was seeking a sister who had immigrated years before with her husband
who had settled in Iowa. Surprisingly, it was in the Midwest where
Vincent spent most of his life before moving his family to Texas at the
age of 56. That was quite an advanced age to pack up one's family and
start over in a very different state. Only Vincent's presence brought
Joseph to Texas. And, perhaps it was those larger populations of Germans
in the northern states that help explain why Ernst, Joseph's younger
brother, eventually felt more at home among those larger concentrations
of German immigrants and their descendents living in New York City and
more particularly in Brooklyn than he did in Texas.

It may be surprising to many that Americans never accepted the diversity
of later arrivals without harboring some animosity and distrust.
Nativism [^6] ran rampant during the War with Mexico, for example, and much
hostility was directed against the immigrants who flooded the ranks of
the volunteer American army at that time. Punishment and discipline
within the ranks by American soldiers was far more vicious, more brutal,
and far worse than supposedly was inflicted at Abu Ghraib. The Irish
immigrants were considered a class of people by many Americans to be
beneath that of the Negroes and received the worst of it, eventually
causing many Irish-born enlisted soldiers to desert to the Mexican Army.
The desertion rate (8.3%) [^7] was the highest of any war ever fought by
Americans. If America was the giant melting pot of the peoples of the
world, it certainly wasn't always what we think today. There was also an
element of distrust of all who arrived, bringing to our shores different
customs, strange sounding languages, and other ways of doing things.
Fortunately, the Germans who settled in the Texas Hill Country were
isolated and left more or less alone for decades. Until 1917 few Texans
complained that the Germans were not assimilating properly into the
Texas population. The sheer density of Germans remaining in towns such
as Fredericksburg at that time provided cover for those seeking to blend
into the population. But it did not mean that life among the Germans in
the Texas Hill Country had not been without problems.

During the antebellum period, slaveholders, those living in the eastern
portions of Texas, had viewed all German-Texans with great suspicion,
especially after an 1854 San Antonio convention of intellectual
German-Texans adopted, among other things, an anti-slavery resolution.[^8]
During the American Civil War, violence against \"the disloyal\"
occurred throughout Texas, not just among the German-Texans. Americans
in both the North and the South had not yet progressed to the point
where difference of opinions could be forgiven or forgotten. In
particular, a gruesome manifestation of Confederate animosities toward
German-Texans that occurred in August 1862 when Confederate forces
caught up with a group of Central Texas Germans on their way to join
Union forces then already in control of the city of New Orleans.[^9] Their
actions, to the Confederacy, were considered treason! The unsuspecting
Germans were ambushed in their camp on the Nueces River, and
thirty-eight German-Texans died in the early morning slaughter; another
twenty were wounded, and a Confederate squad executed nine of the
wounded who had managed to escape the initial ambush.[^10] Fredericksburg
was immediately placed under martial law for the balance of the war. A
reign of terror descended upon German farms as gangs of vigilantes
sympathetic to both the North and the South killed indiscriminately
throughout Gillespie County. Many German families awoke after a night of
terror that saw the kidnapping of their sons for impressment into the
Confederate cause only to discover at dawn that their young sons had
been hanged nearby as a lesson to be loyal to the Confederacy. Relatives
of those slaughtered on the Nueces feared Confederate reprisals if they
retrieved the bodies of their loved ones. Consequently, not a single
family member dared travel to the site of the massacre. Their
coyote-ravished remains and bleached bones were not gathered until the
war was over. They were buried in a common grave in Comfort, Texas where
the only Union monument in the entire South was erected and still
stands. Many German-Texans were staunchly pro-Union, but nevertheless,
some served in the Confederate Army throughout the Civil War.[^11] The
Fredericksburg-Germans learned to keep their opinions to themselves and
formed a cohesiveness that to this day is difficult to penetrate. While
Joseph could blend in among the Fredericksburg-Germans, he stood no more
of a chance for acceptance by them than he had with Vincent's family.



In time Joseph learned that early German explorers had come to
investigate the newly created Republic of Texas to see its diverse
features for themselves. They returned home to write glorious stories of
a land waiting to be cultivated and settled and basically free to those
who dared venture to take advantage of the opportunity the government of
Texas would give them. These published works influenced many to
immigrate. Their articles appearing in German newspapers and published
as books were read by thousands of Germans hoping for a chance to change
the fate they felt awaited them if they remained behind. The numerous
German states were enveloped in an economic morass and burdened with
centuries of traditions that stifled any hope of a better life for them
or their children. To others, Texas was an obsession for those seeking
opportunities, and consequently, Texas became a target for immigration,
for investment, and for hope for a new life to thousands. In the 1830s
Germany was not yet united as a single country and was united only by a
common language spoken in hundreds of tiny, principalities, duchies, and
lesser states. The American Revolution, a revolution that spoke of the
freedom of man, had spawned the French Revolution, a revolution that
added the equality of wealth, but in 1830 German unification was still
four decades away. Much traumatic evolutional and radical
transformations were necessary to bring unification. In time various
German principalities called for a new united German state founded on
more advanced philosophies, including the thoughts of Frederick Engels,
Karl Marx, and other social philosophers advocating new advanced social
economic theories in which the state ruled supreme for the common good.
Many of these concepts were eventually accepted into the new social
economic theories that eventually created the unified German states
under Bismark and were being taught in the schools and universities that
Joseph attended as he received his certifications in accounting. But, in
the 1840s it was no mere coincidence that the various German princes and
barons cooperated to form the *Adelsverein*,[^12] the society that
advocated the colonization of Texas for settlement, development, and
eventually building a trading partner with a new German state that was
certain to come.

German immigrants to the United States came from both larger cities and
from smaller rural areas. People from southern and particularly
southwestern Germany predominated until the late nineteenth century,
when former citizens of Prussia (present-day northern Germany and
Poland) began to arrive in larger numbers in the United States. (Joseph
came from an area just a few miles north of the Swiss border, but most
Germans in the Texas Hill Country came from the central principalities.)
Many immigrants to the United States formed pockets of small socialist
movements and founded a number of important craft unions.[^13] In Texas,
settlements such as Bettinger, Leningen, Sch√∂nburg, and Comfort were
settled by those known as *Freidenker*[^14](free-thinkers), and
Sisterdale[^15] even included the brother-in-law of Karl Marx, the Baron
von Westphalen.[^16] Sisterdale became the intellectual capital of Texas,
for no less than a dozen German Barons[^17] settled there and frequently
met to discuss and debate the latest thoughts on the assent of man! That
Meusebach, the founder of Fredericksburg, also laid out the settlement
of Bettina could lead one to conclude that he was not opposed to
communistic ideas and that such experiments in social thinking were not
all together that radical to him. Germans were exploring and discussing
all options with their newly found freedoms. German-Americans were also
heavily involved in the cultural life, especially in musical
organizations as in most American metropolises, but few elements would
survive. While their initial growth appeared unlimited and unending,
events in the mid-19th century and early in the 20th century caused the
German-American organizations to dissolve or retain a low profile
throughout the balance of the 20th century.[^18] In a few areas, there has
been a reemergence of festivals that are decidedly German, but to a
large degree, German influence vanished from the American scene as
assimilation reached total capacity. The fact that these radicals chose
the Texas Hill Country to settle rather than in the eastern cities of
the United States was remarkable in itself.

According to some historians, the Texas Hill Country was essentially a
trap, a trap with the lure of grass and a beauty unlike anything known
in Germany. Whether those who first settled there thought it as
beautiful as their descendents do today is probably debatable. Arriving
on these windswept, muddy shores at Indianola must have dampened their
vision of a promised land of milk and honey.[^19] It was the same shore
first seen by Cabeza de Vaca, who washed ashore naked and sunburnt some
300 years earlier and was imprisoned for nine long years there by the
Karankawa Indians before escaping and finding his way to the Pacific
Ocean. It was also the very same bay where LaSalle landed in attempting
his ill-fated quest to find the mouth of the Mississippi and where
Stephen F. Austin landed to explore the mouth of the Guadalupe River a
quarter-century before, commenting that the valley of the Guadalupe
River was the most beautiful he had ever seen -- "rolling prairies, soil
very black and deep, mesquite trees, which could supply lumber; dazzling
white limestone, ideal for building, lay all about".[^20] What the Germans
faced in 1845 in Texas proved to be far worse than the six to seven
weeks or more spent cramped aboard rat-infested ships where they saw and
heard only the cries of those who feared they had made a terrible,
terrible mistake.

The society had failed to properly prepare for their arrival. It failed
in its promise to provide transportation, shelter, or food. And it
failed to deliver them safely to their lands. The numerous crosses
marking the graves of those who had died daily on the beaches sank
whatever hope many still held upon their arrival. Now they were told
their journey to the interior was just beginning --- on foot! Those who
had lived in Germany, whether comfortable or not, then learned that they
had to trudge across 250 miles of featureless Texas plains, walking for
hours alongside wagons, that is, if they were among the very few who had
one, for almost all had been confiscated by the United States Army. (The
Germans had landed into the midst of country preparing for a war.) As
they began their trek, inland caravans of American volunteer companies
intersected their route. These rowdy and boisterous men were eager to
fight the Mexicans because Americans believed them to be inferior and
that they did not deserve to own Texas. They were heading south to join
General Taylor's army to guarantee once and for all that Texas would not
be returned to Mexico. However, that was no guarantee, for Mexico's army
was much larger, better equipped, and more seasoned in combat at that
time than that of the United States. War is always an uncertainty, and
the new immigrants found themselves in the middle of a conflict they
little understood or comprehended the intensity of Texan distrust of
Mexicans.

After weeks of suffering cold and damp conditions, the Germans left the
disease-ridden, Texas coast at Indianola behind, creating a trail of
death that followed the winding, muddy Guadalupe River inland along its
seemingly endless bends and turns. Then, when they reached the top of
one rise of ground, they saw before them just more flatness, until at
last at the top of one rise, they saw in the distance something different: a low line that, as they toiled and
inched their way toward it, gradually became hills, hills stretching
across the entire horizon far to the north of them as far as they could
see and out westward to what appeared to be an endless barrier to their
progress northward.[^21] As they came face-to-face with it up close, the
first immigrants had reached their first settlement, and it was named
*Neu Braunfels*[^22] after their prince. Now, those that followed the next
year, skirted westward along the southern edge of a formidable Edwards
Plateau[^23] until they were directed to an entrance, a path into that sea
of hills, the path used for centuries by Native Americans, the Pinta
Trail.[^24] Then, as they ascended that valley, they eventually found
themselves lost in some 24,000 square miles of hills beyond which was
their promised land waiting for them deep in the heart of the Fisher &
Miller Grant.[^25] Only then did they learn, what everyone in Texas had
already known, that the land, their promised land, was firmly in the
possession of the Comanches and that no white man had yet to settle
there since the first years of Spain's entry into Texas! That illfated
attempt ended in the massacre of the Spanish near Menard after which the
Spanish withdrew, ceding all of the land to the Comanches forever.
Mexico did no better in the short 15 years it owned Texas, and the
infant Texas Republic was too poor to fund a serious defense of the
frontier that began literally at the west end of its capital city. The
Pinta Trail was abandoned to the Indians and remained a road of death to
all Spanish, Mexicans, and Texians who dared venture north from San
Antonio. The Germans were the first to attempt to settle there in over
70 years and soon discovered why all others had failed.

The grasses that covered the once rich meadows were already depleted by
roving herds of longhorns that had escaped the Spanish ranches and
haciendas to the south centuries before spreading the mesquite which
threatened to claim the last of any tillable lands. The top soils and
what grasses were left grew slowly and were washed out by the Hill
Country storms that arose seemingly out of nowhere and often were filled
with a fury that none of the German immigrants had seen in their native
lands. Already disillusionment settled in upon the pioneers. What lands
had those authors been describing? What other promises of wealth and
opportunities had they been fed as lies by the *Adelsverein*? Hundreds
of their fellow travelers had either died at Indianola or had died en
route to their promised lands. Would they ever reach paradise? The
landscape would prove to be difficult to conquer without rains. Raising
crops to feed their families would be even more difficult than they had
been led to believe as the chalky, limestone hills reared and exposed
their hard fossilized rocks that broke their plows as they tried to
chisel the sparse soils into something that could support life.
Everywhere the brush had crept into the once lush meadows: small, low,
dense shrubs of cedar and bushes and stunted trees, cat claw and prickly
pear and Spanish daggers, agarita shrubs, shrub oak and juniper, and
mesquite, whose voracious taproots sucked the last ounces of water
hidden in the earth. Everywhere there were dried-up springs from which
it was apparent once had flown an abundance of waters. Hope sprang
eternal among the settlers that one day the rains might return and feed
these springs with their life-giving waters, but the junipers and cedars
that had devoured entire once lush meadows were waiting patiently for
their first drink that they knew was theirs.[^26] The Germans had much to
learn or perish, as so many had already done along the trail from the
coast, and so they coalesced into a cohesive group into which they
admitted few who had not shared in their hardships or paid the price to
live among them.

The early settlers could not believe how fast the brush spread from the
fields they hacked from the wilderness. Not knowing what to grow in this
new world, they learned quickly to adapt by planting corn, the essential
staple of life of the ancient American Indians. They either adapted or
starved but survived they did, and the land began to mold them into
truly unique, rugged pioneers, firm in their beliefs and convictions.
Those that had immigrated here came to preserve a way of life in a new
land of freedom: freedom from aristocrats, nobles and restrictive
councils. With a firm belief in their faith, they sought to invent a new
way of life, steeped in a tradition they refused to abandon. It was all
they knew. They brought their kind of education, and they taught their
children to read and write in the only language they knew: German. Their
language, culture, faith, and customs gave them the strength to survive
and hope for better days. The American Civil War had taught them to be
wary of outsiders, of people from the Old South. East Texas was a
different kind of life, and the Germans who later chose to settle in the
richer, fertile lands of East Texas were more exposed to other Texas
settlers. They had a harder time remaining isolated and keeping their
identities. And, they had not been settled as an organized colonization
effort. The Hill Country Germans had their ways and were prepared to
keep them and their traditions, even if it meant that they might be
singled out from among the average Texans as being somewhat different.
Their flock was completed by 1860, and save for the Civil War, for the
next half-century the Germans in the Hill Country were left alone. Few
Texans cared how they lived or what they thought. It is little known nor
understood by many that more Germans came to Texas after the Civil War,
from 1865-1890, than came in the entire thirty years of immigration
before the war. These settled primarily in the eastern half of the
state.[^27] Very few new Germans chose to join those who had settled in
Fredericksburg. Consequently, in 1917 Joseph was as much of a stranger
to those descendents of the pioneers as if he had been an immigrant from
New York.

There never has been a decade in which the United States did not undergo
some kind of change, change that set a recent decade apart from the
previous one. The first decade of the twentieth century saw change that
stemmed from a number of things and included a continuation of the
massive migration of peoples from Europe. Americans in 1910 looked upon
all newer immigrants as being alien to everything they thought America
should be and as they had molded it. Certainly, many Americans felt
threatened as foreigners moved into their neighborhoods, competed for
jobs, and sent their children into schools dressed in traditional garbs
and speaking alien languages. After all, by the turn of the twentieth
century, millions had immigrated in the hope for a chance to share in
the American dream. As each ethnic group assimilated into the American
culture, each impacted America in its own way. The process of becoming
an American was not orchestrated, dictated, or required, but a natural
one, allowing each ethnic group to retain a certain identity that made
them unique. However, there were also certain basic requirements made of
immigrants for citizenship; among them the government required them to
be at least 18 years of age, have resided in the United States for 5
years, possess a working knowledge of the English language, and pass a
citizenship test.[^28] It was just that simple. Joseph had made his
application for citizenship while living in San Antonio in 1915, but by
the time the United States entered the war in Europe, he had not met the
fiveyear requirement. That became a problem as various groups in the
United States took stock of what was expected of individuals to
be classified as patriotic and loyal Americans. German-Americans became
an easy target, for many had such pride in their mother countries that
they formed national associations to proudly promote the country of
their origin.

The National German-American Alliance, (NGAA) or *Deutschamerikanische
Nationalbund*, was founded in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1901 by
operating as a federation of ethnic German associations. Its mission was
to \"promote and preserve German culture in America,\" essentially
seeking to resist the assimilation of Germans in America. At the height
of its popularity, the national organization had chapters in 44 states
and membership levels of 2.5 million people. As a professional movement,
the NGAA promoted German language instruction in school, the foundation
of educational societies, including the German Historical Society, and
the publication of histories and journals to demonstrate \"the role
German-Americans played in the development of the United States.\" The
organization was given a United States Congressional Charter in 1907.
With support from the National Brewers Association and brewing companies
across the country, as well as German farmers and commercial
enterprises, the NGAA grew quickly. However, because of rising
anti-German sentiment due to the NGAA's outspokenness against
prohibition, its stance for neutrality during the first years of World
War I and its support of Germany, especially its practice of raising
money for German war relief, the NGAA\'s charter was revoked in August
1918.[^29] Joseph could not have helped but notice that Americans were
quickly beginning to wipe the stain of everything associated with
Germany from its history as it entered World War I. He had seen its
beginning already in late 1914 when he lived in San Antonio. This
massive effort succeeded, and he soon understood that he needed to walk
a fine line to avoid calling attention to himself. The eventual
consequence of this movement was that ethnic Germans became
super-assimilated into America almost without a trace by the end of the
20th century. That demise was initiated by the passage of the Sedition
Act of 1918.[^30]
Many Americans felt that such an act was necessary because during the
period of American neutrality (1914-1917), the period which began
immediately after Joseph immigrated to Texas, many German language
newspapers published here defended the Central Powers, denounced the
Allies (England, France and Russia), and openly criticized the Wilson
administration\'s foreign policy. Since the United States was officially
"neutral," there should have been no problem in taking sides, but it
irritated many Americans nevertheless. Some German-Texans formed
chapters of the German Red Cross and participated in humanitarian relief
efforts to benefit the Central Powers. After the U.S. entered the war,
there were additional reasons for Texans to be suspicious of the
Germans, and it was not long before some German-Americans ran into
trouble. A German-American private stationed in San Antonio was arrested
and received a five-year sentence for trying to provide U.S. military
information to Germany. In El Paso, U.S. soldiers shot a German citizen
as he attempted to cross the Rio Grande, purportedly to provide the
Mexican government with U.S. military information. Although incidents
like these justified concern among many Texans, the responses to these
and other incidents soon lost all sense of proportion to the danger.[^31]
Among those who viewed America as a land of opportunity, learning
English and assimilating into the population was important if they hoped
to succeed. Joseph had set his sights on what he needed to do once he
decided to immigrate, but prior to 1910, he obviously had given no
thought of becoming a part of the huge migration to the United States,
or he would have chosen English to study instead of French, Italian, and
Spanish during his school years. Not speaking English upon arriving in
Texas proved to be a severe handicap for him. Once here, however, he
quickly discovered that distinct disadvantage and sought to overcome it
by enrolling in classes in San Antonio to study English, accounting, and
Spanish. As a newcomer, he was observant of what was happening around
him. He only had to step out of his rooming house on Commerce Street or
listen nightly to those who congregated on the San Fernando Square, a
block away, to understand that not all Americans appreciated the massive
and constant influx of immigrants to their shores. The explosion of new
immigrants at the turn of the twentieth century could be felt and seen
on the streets of San Antonio. But, these immigrants were from Mexico.
San Antonio had always been an ethic mixture of cultures since its
founding. Consequently, the current influx of refugees streaming into
the city was not new. However, until only recently, its largest ethnic
group had been Germans, not Mexicans, but the 1910 Revolution in Mexico
changed all that as Mexicans by the thousands fled the endless years of
violence and revolution in America's neighbor to the south.
Nevertheless, it had to please Joseph as he observed that he was living
in a city that was also shaped by a history of German immigration.
Joseph wrote of the new change taking place in San Antonio as he tried
to find employment there toward the end of his schooling in 1915. San
Antonio was about to change again from the weight of refugees from
Mexico, who were set to eclipse what the Germans had brought to the
city. However, Joseph felt smug living in a city diverse with ethnic
cultures at that time, especially one so heavily influenced by Germans
who had arrived some six decades earlier.

In 1910 there were about 45 thousand people out of a population of 3.9
million residing in Texas who had been born in Germany, but only 4.5% of
all residents were of \"German stock." Germans represented a relatively
insignificant portion of the Texas population; only 1.15% of Texans
could claim Germany as their birthplace, while first- and
second-generation Germans formed less than 5% of the Texas population.[^32]
German-Texans had settled in compact communities, establishing an
especially strong presence in Central Texas in the areas around Austin
and San Antonio.[^33] Fredericksburg, in particular, was quite removed and
not particularly easy to get to before the turn of the century.
Traveling north from San Antonio, even with good roads, was a three-day
journey by a good horse and more with a wagon. The railroad did not
arrive until 1913, well past the time when the coming of a railroad
could have a significant impact upon a community.

The Fredericksburg-Germans had been basically left alone, and they very
likely wanted it that way, especially after their experiences during the
American Civil War. How Joseph first heard of Fredericksburg is not
known, but in travelling to San Antonio in early August 1914, his
journey took him by rail through New Braunfels, the sister city of
Fredericksburg. The large concentration of Germans living there could
not have escaped his attention.[^34] How could that city with all its
Germans not have aroused his curiosity? There is no evidence that he
ever travelled to Fredericksburg prior to 1917 despite the fact that it
had been linked to San Antonio by rail since 1913. Fredericksburg and
its people continued to remain isolated and content in their heritage
and culture, a culture that was not really different from other German
settlements. However, parts of that culture conflicted with trends and
movements that had gained support among those Americans that sought to
remedy issues that they found troubling and evil. Naturally, the growing
concern towards the abolishment of alcohol was one such problem, and
that brought an immediate attention to those of German descent. The
other was a growing movement to win women the right to vote. Joseph had
to marvel that a country could so become obsessed with beer. That it
also was considering allowing women to vote may have been a different
matter.

The movement against alcohol began in the previous century, and several
times it had come close to winning statewide elections for the
prohibition of alcohol. Each time the prohibitionists went down to
defeat, more anger was directed at those areas where the vote was the
strongest against prohibition. Of course, those areas had the most
German-Americans living in them. The Germans loved their beer, and it
made no sense to them to single out beer as an evil. Consequently, the
Germans in Texas were already a target long before the outbreak of war
in Europe, and many of these battles had been fought long before Joseph
arrived. The Prohibitionists joined others to blame German-Texans for
blocking a statewide prohibition amendment and for allegedly supporting
\"wet\" candidates. They were joined by the suffragists, who had also
grown to dislike German-Texans because of their lack of support for
women\'s suffrage. These two movements had to strike Joseph as being
rather strange. He had grown up in a country where beer and wine were
never considered vices. And, the role of women, no matter how bad it had
been for his own mother, was not an issue that needed a solution. It was
the way things were. What else in this new world would Joseph have to
contend with? But, had he kept score, he might have noticed that every
opposition to change catered to developing a growing distrust of
German-Texans.

Joseph had grown up in a country where beer and wine were readily
available. His father had even bought an inn where beer and wine were a
major offering. And, of course, his father had imported and stored
barrels of wine along the River Aach. He certainly drank his share of
beer and wine when working in Langenargen. The cozy Weinstube[^35] along
the shores of Lake Constance were popular and filled with people
enjoying a few hours of relaxation and conversation enhanced with
spirits. What better way of life could there be than that? The idea that
Texas and the United States wanted to make drinking alcoholic beverages
illegal had to be alien to him. Germans-Texans were vehemently opposed
to every attempt to vote in prohibition. Texas counties with large
populations of German voters never approved of the national prohibition
movement and initially ignored it when the amendment finally passed. The
temperance movement sought to persuade people to stop drinking, while
the prohibition movement aimed to make the sale and manufacture of
liquor illegal.[^36] On February 28, 1918, the Texas House voted to ratify
the national prohibition amendment. The Senate agreed four days later.
Effective at once, 1,800 of Texas' 2,500 saloons were closed until the
amendment was fully ratified by the required number of states.[^37] Then
the rest of the saloons were forced to close. Texas women were
overwhelmingly in favor of prohibition.[^38] From the German-Texans'
standpoint, women's suffrage movement was merely a political trick to
double the prohibitionist vote. Worse, women's suffrage threatened the
role of women as wives and mothers and thereby the centrality of the
family. [^39] Where Joseph stood on this issue can only be surmised.
Perhaps his penchant later for insisting that his own daughters never
accept the menial tasks that his mother had suffered spoke for his
support of women suffrage. He insisted that his daughters all received a
college education and became professionals. But, for now, he may have
simply added this latest twist of events to his great experiment in
America.

In the crucible of war with Germany, Texans combined patriotism with
ethnic intolerance and resentment to create an anti-German hysteria that
had been seething for decades.[^40] First, the German-Texans supported a
social agenda that advocated free schools and the abolition of slaves
among other things. Then, they consistently voted for "wet" candidates
who would not vote to ban alcohol. And, of course, they didn't strongly
believe in the rights of women. With Germans in Texas having less than
5% of the population, one would think their influence hardly mattered,
but it did matter to many who developed a pack-like mentality normally
found among dogs on the hunt. This was their chance to settle a
long-festering hatred for German-Texans. And, there were other reasons
for concern over German-Americans\' support for the war against
Germany.[^41] Whether they were valid was another issue. German-Texans in
1917, like most German-Americans, had remained proud of their ethnic
heritage, whether they lived in East Texas or had settled in the Hill
Country. Yet, cultural loyalty to Germany appeared to conflict with
patriotic loyalty to the United States.[^42] Many were of the opinion that
both could not coexist. After the United States' declaration of war,
conditions in Texas deteriorated quickly, and it was definitely time for
Joseph to leave the Hamilton area.

The significance of these incidences cannot be overstated, as even the
most assimilated German-Americans saw the German language as one of the
primary sources of ethnic cohesion. The banning of German language
instruction, along with Prohibition that followed, was a profound attack
on German-American cultural and community life. The German-Americans
never recovered from these attacks.[^43] When the United States entered the
war, some northern states, such as Iowa, made speaking foreign languages
in public illegal.[^44] German language theaters suffered a similar
decline, and many church groups decided to abandon largely the use of
German in church services.[^45] On one hand, it can be argued that by 1914,
only older Germans in much of the United States were still attending
German language church services while more and more of the younger
members were attending English services (in Lutheran, Evangelical and
Catholic churches). Consequently, some of the new rules and laws did not
apply nor did they matter. In German parochial schools, many children
spoke English among themselves, though some of their classes were in
German. Assimilation was already occurring, but in 1917--18, nearly all
German language instruction officially ended, as did most German
language church services. That was not the case in Fredericksburg,
however, and the German language used in church services continued, for
there were few who spoke English.

It was quite different in areas in other states where after two or three
generations in America, most Germans were assimilated to American
customs, some of which they heavily influenced and had switched their
language to English voluntarily.[^46] In the Texas Hill County, those
second and third generation German-Texans were still speaking German as
their first language. Their isolation made that possible, but eventually
assimilation would happen. Some parents vowed not to teach their
children German, nor would they speak it themselves. Other
Fredericksburg families never stopped speaking German at home. In other
cities the opposite happened. In Cincinnati, a city with a large German
population, reaction to anti-German sentiment went to the extreme.
During World War I, the Public Library of Cincinnati withdrew all German books
from its shelves.[^47] This may seem rather ironic for that to have
happened there, for the first conductor of the Cincinnati Sympathy had
been Frank Van Der Stucken,[^48] a native of Fredericksburg, Texas. In many
German communities, and Fredericksburg would be not exceptional, German
was the language of religious, educational, and commercial affairs.[^49]
However, one can view the original county public records kept since the
founding of Fredericksburg and note the beautifully scripted handwriting
to realize that they instantly recorded what was required in English and
did so with an excellent penmanship even as they continued to conduct
their business in their native tongue.

So it did not matter that as many as 75,000 to 100,000 German-Texans may
have used German predominantly or exclusively in 1910 in their homes, or
at work, or even in their schools and churches, or continued to read
newspapers printed in German. In 1914 twenty-four German language
newspapers in Texas claimed a combined circulation of over 70,000.[^50]

Joseph was happy to find German newspapers upon his arrival, for it was
his source of information as to what was happening in Texas, along the
Mexican border, and at home. They were a source of consolation to him
when they were all on which he could rely on his first months in Hico.
The newspapers printed only in English quickly acquired an anti-German
slant and were heavily influenced by British and French propaganda. And,
he certainly was not likely to hear much news from his cousins in Hico
as they preferred to echo and ridicule Joseph with the alleged German
atrocities they read about. Meanwhile, when the United States entered
the war, the existence of such German newspapers did not go unnoticed by
those to whom it did matter. Texans\' historic distrust of German-Texans
helped inspire a wave of anti-German activities.[^51] Some of those reasons
had lain dormant since the Civil War. Now, in 1917, many Texans felt it
time to settle accounts with German-Texans, and Joseph was caught in
this conflict whether he liked it or not.

For some Germans, assimilation seemed inevitable; wartime pressures
simply had made it expedient even if driven by those who distrusted
them. Some may have believed there were genuine and pervasive loyalty
problems among their fellow German-Texans. Still others may have
participated in the anti-German hysteria in order to avert character
assaults or physical violence on themselves. Regardless of their
motivations, German-Americans who participated in the anti-German
campaign lent credence to the belief that retention of German ethnicity
was a sign of disloyalty.[^52] They often acted far worse against their own
than against the Americans. Joseph, however, was learning English simply
to be better prepared to earn a good living. He did not join with any
group or advocate any position whatsoever. He had already seen that
argument was futile. He remained quiet. Meanwhile other Texans saw it as
a mission to eliminate German ethnicity everywhere they found it.
However, that goal was not equated with success in contributing to the
war effort by many. Instead of mobilizing German-American support for
the war abroad, the anti-German campaign created a war at home.[^53] Of
course, it had not helped the American attitude toward Germany when the
Zimmermann Note was intercepted by British intelligence. President
Wilson used it to inflame the American public against Germany, and it
provided just the ammunition the anti-German hysteria in the United
States needed to justify their suspicions against Germans and
German-Americans.[^54]

As America entered the war with the same gusto as those European
countries had done three years earlier, na√Øve and fearless, World War I
intensified fears among Americans left at home living side by side with
neighbors who acted somewhat differently, participated in centuries of
traditional folk customs, perhaps enjoyed different and exotic foods,
and continued to speak in their native tongues. The German-Americans
became in an instant a prime suspect ethnic group. The wartime
experiences of German-Americans in the Midwest and northeastern states
are often referenced, but only recently has the problem been addressed
how the Germans in Texas fared.[^55] In the early 20th century,
German-Americans remained this nation's largest immigrant group.
Although they were regarded as a model of successful assimilation, they
suddenly faced vicious and sometimes violent attacks on their loyalty
when the United States went to war against Germany in 1917.[^56] Seemingly
overnight, German-Americans were suspected of disloyalty and accused of
treasonous acts. These attacks were led and encouraged directly from the
highest offices in the United States, the federal government itself.
Headed by the President Woodrow Wilson, his Justice Department eagerly
followed suit with the full weight of its power and committed to rooting
out any subversive activities no matter how slight, how innocent, and
how innocuous.[^57] There was no mercy and no moment of forgetfulness.

The national Anti-German sentiments also filtered down into ordinary
cities and towns. Eventually, the American Red Cross, in a fear of
sabotage, barred individuals with German last names from joining.[^58] The
American Protective League (APL) [^59] was particularly hard on
German-Americans, some of whom they helped lose their jobs and some of
whom they publicly humiliated by forcing them to kiss the American flag
in public or recite the Pledge of Allegiance.[^60] Other thousands were
forced to buy war bonds to prove their loyalty.[^61]The APL used newsprint,
posters, radio, telegraph, cable, and movies to broadcast its message. A
volunteer services corps was created that called itself "The Four-minute
Men." Its 75,000 members spoke around the country in 5,200 communities
and gave 755,190 speeches before the war ended.[^62]During its lifetime,
the organization had over twenty bureaus and divisions, with
commissioner\'s offices in nine foreign countries.[^63]
Meanwhile, dozens of \"patriotic organizations,\" that had names like
the American Protective League (APL) and the American Defense Society
(ADS), sprang up. These groups spied, tapped telephones, and opened mail
in an effort to ferret out \"spies and traitors. [^64] The former had
worked hand in hand with the Bureau of Investigation. The targets of
these groups were those who had called for peace, had questioned the
Allies\' progress, or had criticized the government\'s policies.[^65] The
American Protective League was an American World War I era private
organization that along with federal police like the Bureau of
Investigation worked in support of the anti-German Empire movement and
against anti-war citizens and organizations. Formed by a wealthy Chicago
businessman, at its height of power, the APL had 250,000 members in 600
cities. Officially condoned by the attorney general, the APL gave
support to the Bureau of Investigation, the precursor to the FBI. A
private organization with no legal authority, APL members acted as
vigilantes, allegedly violating the civil liberties of American
citizens. The APL also had been accused of having illegally detained
citizens associated with progressive, labor, and pacifist movements.[^66]
The group advocated entry by the United States in the war against
Germany and against the Bolsheviks after the war.[^67]

The Texas State Council of Defense, (SCD) hoped to "make evidences of
disloyalty decidedly unpopular." [^68] Established to cooperate with the
National Council of Defense, restrictions were placed on the customary
freedoms of speech and press. Every public school was required to be
equipped with a suitable flag and to spend at least ten minutes a day in
teaching "intelligent patriotism."[^69] "Give until it hurts," "Do Your
Bit," "Buy More Bonds, and other slogans soon found a place in the
popular mind.[^70] Their wish came true. The anti-German campaign was so
successful that some German-Texans were driven to suicide to escape the
intolerant atmosphere of their communities. A Fayette County
German-Texan farmer, fearing that a failed crop would prevent him from
purchasing the amount of Liberty Bonds to which he had subscribed shot
himself rather than face the local Liberty Bond committee. Near Elgin,
Texas, a seventy-five year old German-Texan sadly hanged himself,
distressed that he was required to register as an alien because he could
not find his citizenship papers. Another incident in Seguin saw a
Lutheran minister shoot himself after the U.S. Justice Department
initiated a loyalty investigation because of alleged \"disloyal\"
remarks the minister had made.[^71] Of course, Texans\' fierce assault on
German-American individuals and institutions only mirrored the national
mood. Joseph quickly observed that to protest served no purpose. After
three years in Texas, he already keenly understood the minds of the
average Texan, even those of his cousins, and he knew that his only
recourse was to keep a very low profile. In 1917 he registered for the
draft, and he volunteered for service along with his friend from
Hamilton, Hervey Chesley, Jr. Together they had traveled to Camp Leon
Springs near San Antonio for physicals. Joseph failed his physical. With
Hervey off to the front, Joseph's position in Hamilton became more
problematic. What more could he do? Hysteria was now running rampant,
but Texans were not out of character with the rest of America.

Texas' vigilantism only characterized the anti-German campaign
throughout the nation. Since the Wilson administration intervened only
when confronted with blatant violence, and then only reluctantly, it was
not surprising that state and local governments acquiesced, encouraged,
or actively participated in the war against everything remotely
German.[^72] German-Americans assimilating before the war began on a
natural, if at times an irregular schedule, but now the assimilation
efforts hastened a process that many watchful groups at first encouraged
and eventually demanded. Casualties on the home front did not approach
the levels reached in Europe and the violations of constitutional rights
pale in comparison to those that Japanese Americans suffered during
World War II from an executive order issued by then President Franklin
D. Roosevelt that to this day has never been rescinded.[^73] In a country
that boasted about its freedom of thought and expression, the excesses
of the anti-German efforts can hardly be justified, especially where the
victims were almost always loyal American citizens who had committed no
crimes even by the restrictive legal standards of World War I.

The Committee on Public Information, also known as the CPI and the Creel
Committee, were independent agencies of the government of the United
States intended to influence U.S. public opinion regarding American
intervention in World War I. It had been established by President
Woodrow Wilson through Executive Order 2594, April 13, 1917.[^74] The
purpose of the CPI was to influence American public opinion toward
supporting his intervention in World War I via a prolonged propaganda
campaign. Among those who participated in it were socialists who
remarked that \"the essence of democratic society\" was the
\"engineering of consent\", by which propaganda was the necessary method
for democracies to promote and garner support for policy. At first the
CPI used material that was based on fact but later spun it to present an
upbeat picture of the American war effort. Very quickly, however, the
CPI began churning out raw propaganda picturing Germans as evil
monsters.[^75] Joseph remarked in an early letter written home from San
Antonio that he hardly recognized the Germans being described in the
daily newspapers. Now he and everyone else could see it on the big
screen. The hatred generated against Germans by official government
agencies was now everywhere, including the silent movies. What had been
missing had been a way to reach those Americans who might not read
newspapers, attend meetings, or watch movies. For this task the Division
of Pictorial Publicity was created. America\'s most popular illustrators
were more than eager to help, and they produced some of World War One\'s
most lasting images.[^76]
Hollywood movie makers joined in on the propaganda by making movies such
as *The Claws of the Hun*, *The Prussian Cur*,[^77]*To Hell with the
Kaiser*, and *The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin*. These titles illustrated
the message the CPI intended to convey.[^78] (Americans continue to be
subjected to films from the Nazi era to this day.)[^79] This raw propaganda
that had been put out by the government included complete fabrications,
such as images and stories of German soldiers killing babies and
hoisting them on bayonets. CPI pamphlets were created that warned
citizens to be on the lookout for German spies.[^80] The government\'s
Committee on Public Information flooded the country with grotesque
anti-German propaganda.[^81] Basically, the American government was
encouraging mob rule. Committee work was not curtailed until after July
1, 1918, and domestic activities stopped only after the Armistice was
agreed to on November 11, 1918. Foreign operations against Germany ended
only after June 30, 1919, almost three-quarters of a year later. The CPI
was finally officially abolished by Executive Order 3154 on August 21,
1919.[^82] This was two months after a new German government had been
forced to sign the Treaty of Versailles.[^83] American troops had already
largely returned to the states by the time the treaty to end all wars
was signed. It had been a long, four-year nightmare that neither side
could have imagined when it began.

Still, many Americans throughout the war felt that the American way of
life was under a serious internal challenge. Industrialization had
contributed to the rise of organized labor, which seemed to be
infiltrated, if not dominated, by anarchists, socialists, and perhaps
even communists.[^84] Perhaps that was why Ernst was not so opposed to the
rise and demands of labor at the time when he entered the New York labor
market a decade later. Socialism had had a much firmer grip on German
culture since that country's unification in 1870; consequently, what
appeared to be radical proposals to Americans were more natural and
casual to Germans. Other Americans of Anglo-Saxon descent were
particularly distressed at the large influx of Catholic and Orthodox
South and East European immigrants.[^85] Nativism was on the rise again,
and it was rather easy to identify those who supported the Axis powers
before American's entrance into the war.

One of the signal events of the initial wartime experience



<center>

![Movie Poster - To Hell with the Kaiser](/assets/images/chapters/6/kaiser.jpg)
**Movie Poster - To Hell with the Kaiser** [^86]

</center>


One of the signal events of the initial wartime experience had been the
intense wave of anti-German feeling and activity that appeared out of
nowhere to sweep across the United States.[^87] On the other hand, a small
minority of Germans, essentially those most involved in German
organizational life, came to see Germany as being incapable of wrong.
Only through insidious conspiracy or irrational prejudice could America
possibly side with the Allies. These German-Americans had directed their
ire toward the British.[^88] But, their voices were far too weak to match
the ferociousness being generated by the anti-German voices. The more
they protested the more attention they brought upon themselves. New
immigrants, such as Joseph, had to be very careful, for during World War
I, German-Americans, especially those born abroad, were sometimes
accused of appearing too sympathetic to the German Empire.[^89] The entry of the United States into the war thrilled former President
Theodore Roosevelt who immediately denounced all \"hyphenated
Americanism\" and insisted that dual loyalties were impossible in
wartime.[^90] He made constant accusations of widespread disloyalty among
\"hyphenates\" and by 1916 had already demanded a call for national
military preparedness at a time when President Wilson was falsely
campaigning on a promise to keep America out of the war.[^91] Of course, we
know today that Wilson was lying.[^92] Soon after his arrival, Joseph had
noted the obvious slant in the American press which was given access
only to British and French wires services. These sources contributed to
the American press echoing how they wished to portray Germany, without a
word of protest from the Wilson administration.

With the entry of the United States into the conflict in Europe, strong
anti-German sentiments and activities appeared anywhere there were
German-Americans. For some this meant prosecution under wartime
legislation for those accused of holding pro-German sentiments. In rapid
order an Ohio German-American minister was indicted under the Espionage
Act for remarks he made while conducting a soldier\'s burial service. A
German-American minister in St. Louis was arrested for criticizing
President Woodrow Wilson.[^93] Sometimes the crusade against
German-Americans took the form of incendiary rhetoric. The Iowa State
Council of Defense maintained that those who used \"disloyal\" language
should be imprisoned and those who committed disloyal acts should simply
be shot, apparently without a trial. The *Washington Post* suggested
that occasional lynchings by patriot mobs were justified in light of the
need to silence \"enemy propaganda.\"[^94] With prevalent encouragement
from news services, the effect of such incessant propaganda promoted
hysterical hatred for all things German.[^95]\
The most notorious incident was the lynching of a German-born resident
of Collinsville, Illinois.[^96] Believing that the loyal but
suspicious-looking resident was involved in a plan to dynamite a local
coal mine, a group of miners dragged him through the streets while a mob
followed. A crowd of two hundred watched passively as his assailants
hanged him for his alleged disloyalty.[^97] The hanging was widely
condoned, as lynching was a common occurrence throughout the southern
states at the time. A local newspaper, the *Edwardsville Intelligencer,* did call it \"unlawful and
unjustifiable\" but argued that a traitor would be dealt with just as
harshly in Germany. The mayor dispatched a telegram to a senator in
which he argued that the unfortunate German's death was due to the
failure of Congress to pass effective laws against disloyalty. This was
apparently a commonly held point of view, repeated endlessly in the
newspapers.[^98] Many retaliatory acts, administered by ordinary citizens,
were taking place almost spontaneously across the United States. A
citizen from Florida, who had German origins, was badly flogged by a
citizen's vigilance committee. A tailor of German descent in Oakland,
California, was hanged from a tree. A man in San Jose, California, was
tarred, feathered, and chained to a cannon for alleged pro-German
sentiments. The Knights of Liberty[^99] struck in Tulsa, Oklahoma, where
they tarred and feathered a German-American before giving him fifty
lashes and making him promise to leave the city. A German Lutheran
pastor was beaten for preaching in German after the city council had
forbidden it, and another pastor was publicly flogged for negative
comments about local war committees.[^100] Anti-German behavior was not
just limited to correcting those whose actions caught the attention of
loyal Americans. Even the unspoken German or written German was
addressed and needed to be erased from the American scene.

In California, folk songs that were originally German were removed from
children\'s songbooks. In schools across the nation, teaching the German
language came to an end. Libraries removed from their shelves books by
German authors. Under pressure from the public and a crusade, again
championed by Theodore Roosevelt, the editors of many German language
newspapers shut their papers down. Even animals associated with Germany
did not escape American scrutiny. Children threw stones at dachshunds
because of their association with being German*.* And, teachers lost
their jobs for expressing their opinions on the issue of war and
peace.[^101] Joseph had found it difficult find a job in San Antonio in
1915 because of the influx of Mexicans willing to take low-paying jobs.
Two years later it was a greater impossibility not only because of
Mexicans, but also because of the war. He had been fortunate to have a
job with relatives until he had at last completed his law degree, but
now smaller towns of Central Texas became caught up with the anti-German
hysteria as well, outbursts of which were a form of war fever, an almost
irrational hysteria that accompanied the intense desire for national
unity in time of war.[^102] Some sort of a calling to arms was always
required in time of national peril, but nothing had been seen like this
in America for decades. By the time the United States entered the war in
1917, American public opinion had begun to seize upon the idea that true
Americanism entailed rejection of all foreign values even to the extent
of giving up the use of any mother language.[^103]
Whether Joseph read of these acts is questionable, but he certainly
would have read and heard what happened in Texas, where the war on all
things German produced casualties in several ways. In Bastrop County, a
\"duly-qualified deputy sheriff\" led a group of vigilantes in pursuit
of a German farmer who had not cooperated with the local Liberty Bond
drive.[^104] On catching up with his muledrawn wagon, the deputy sheriff
held the farmer with one hand while fatally shooting him with the other.
After beating the victim\'s widow, the men escorted her home, keeping
her at gunpoint for the duration of the journey. *The Giddings Deutsches
Volksblatt* sadly noted that the posse\'s participants had included two
German-Texans, as if that had given gave creditability to their
actions. [^105] Hoping to appear loyal, many German-Americans became far
worse at outing their fellow neighbors than others. The use of physical
violence was common and fast. A Seguin, Texas farmer who spoke only
German was painted yellow and chased with a whip through the town
square. Joseph could not fail to hear that six San Antonio Germans, who
had declined to join the Red Cross, were flogged. An Austin County
German-Texan was whipped after he \"made remarks derogatorily with
reference to the Red Cross.\" A Lutheran minister in Bishop, Texas,
received a flogging from a group of men after he held a German-language
\"revival service\" the same evening as a Liberty Bond rally. A West
Texas German-Methodist minister narrowly escaped a lynching at the hands
of a mob claiming he had \"baptized an infant in the name of the
Kaiser.\"[^106] Elsewhere, a native-born German was lynched by a mob of
over five hundred people.[^107] There may have been much truth in Joseph's
story that he left Hamilton because a mob hanged the only other German
in town.

In the United States, everything German had become an anathema almost
overnight, including the German language. A series of laws passed
beginning in 1917 made English the only language of instruction
permitted in schools.[^108] The reality was that children suddenly weren\'t
allowed to speak German. Many affected had very little knowledge of
English because in isolated areas such as Fredericksburg, there simply
were no English-speaking persons with whom to converse. The overwhelming
evidence indicated that nationally, the German-American school had been
a bilingual one much (perhaps for a whole generation or more) earlier
than 1917, and the majority of the pupils may have been English-dominant
bilinguals from the early 1880s on.[^109] However, in some smaller towns
like Fredericksburg, many residents were more familiar with German than
English, and its local newspaper, *Der Wochenblatt,* never ceased
publishing in the German language during the war. Many church services
also continued in German throughout the war. Consequently and strangely,
Fredericksburg escaped the intense kind of scrutiny encumbered by other
small towns across Texas, although several Loyalty Leagues were created
in the county, one in Fredericksburg and another in Harper.

Other forms of anti-German activity encouraged everywhere included
changing the names of streets.[^110] Americans appear to go through this
motion every now and then. Most recently, French Fries were renamed
"American Fries" to protest something the French had done. During the
first war with Germany, sauerkraut was renamed \"liberty cabbage\" in a
fit of anti-German feeling. German language books were removed from the
libraries in some communities. Many German-Americans, especially
immigrants, were forced to sign loyalty oaths pledging their fidelity to
the United States.[^111]Some Germans during this time also \"Americanized\"
their names (e.g. Schmidt to Smith, M√ºller to Miller, Rickenbacher to
Rickenbacker, Eisenhauer to Eisenhower) and limited their use of the
German language in public places.[^112]Then things got really ugly! To show
their loyalty, some German-American newspapers placed the flag of the
United States with a short excerpt from \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" in
a prominent place on its editorial page. Many of these flags would
remain there throughout the 1920s. Direct calls to show one's support
for President Woodrow Wilson was expected from everyone whether or not
of German descent. The German-American papers made a very strong effort
to encourage their readers to buy Liberty Bonds.[^113] German-Americans
were politically and culturally highly visible in the United States in
the century before World War I; consequently, their ethnic press was
probably the largest and most diverse of any immigrant
group; political and cultural organizations abounded, especially in
urban areas.[^114]The war delivered a great blow to the Germanlanguage
press in America. Of the more than five hundred German-language
periodicals that had existed before the war, less than half survived the
war years.[^115] Additionally, German-language newspapers were often
prevented from being delivered at the whim of a mail carrier.[^116]
Publications by the National German-American Alliance were withheld by
the post office.[^117]Accepting delivery cast suspicion on one's patriotism
and many recipients were harassed. In February of 1918, the United State
Senate began an investigation of the National German-American Alliance,
after which the organization voted itself out of existence.[^118]

<center>

![Beat back the Hun with Liberty Bonds Propaganda Poster](/assets/images/chapters/6/hun.jpg)

**Beat back the Hun with Liberty Bonds Propaganda Poster** [^119]

</center>

The concern over the foreign language press was not unique to Texas. In
October 1917, Congress enacted legislation requiring foreign language
papers to file sworn translations of war-related articles with local
postmasters. Those that failed to comply lost their mailing privileges.
Some papers obtained exemptions from the filing requirement; the
*AustinWochenblatt* proudly noted that it had been the first
German-language paper in the nation to do so. But most German-language
papers were not as fortunate and were obligated to provide translations,
to carry all war news in English, or to omit war reports entirely.[^120]
Soon after the declaration of war in April 1917, most German-Texan
newspapers brought their editorial positions into line with U.S.
policy.[^121] Even San Antonio\'s *Katholische Rundschau*, an ardent
supporter of Germany before April 1917, moderated its previously
relentless attacks on the Wilson administration. Although it protested
press censorship, it endorsed censorship of the mails and told its
readers to accept the sacrifices of war \"without complaint.\"[^122] This
may have served as one explanation as to why Joseph's letters were not
getting through or perhaps, those of his mother's could not reach him.

Fearful of appearing disloyal, the German-language press became
unwilling to question the certainty of Allied victory once the U.S.
joined the war.[^123] In a further effort to help in the war against
Germany and to alleviate anti-German sentiment at home, many
German-Texan papers became part of the American government\'s propaganda
program. Like so many American newspapers, *The Neu-Braunfelser Zeitung*
acquired the habit of printing the phrase, \"Buy Liberty Bonds,\" with
obnoxious frequency, and together with the *Fredericksburg Wochenblatt*,
praised the committee.[^124] Given such efforts, the paper could maintain
that \"there are no German newspapers in our country; there are only
American papers in the German language.\" Still, many Texans were
reluctant to accept this reality. As the secretary of one county council
of defense complained, the German-language papers seemed to do only what
was required, without \"the spice and the pep\" that characterized truly
loyal newspapers.[^125] Now it became a matter of degree; just how sincere
was their loyalty? Moreover, it appeared to many that the
German-language press had come to support the American cause only when
faced with charges of disloyalty.[^126]

Even if the German language press was needed to propagandize
German-Texans, the councils ultimately sought the elimination of these
papers.[^127] This campaign enjoyed considerable success and was sustained
by popular sentiment. In Texas, as in other states, the number of
German-language publications declined by approximately half between 1914
and 1919.[^128] The Texas legislature enacted a law making English the
exclusive language of instruction and prohibiting foreign language
instruction until high school in all public schools.[^129] Believing this legislation to be insufficient, local officials often imposed more rigorous measures.[^130]
At the University of Texas, the former U.S. Ambassador to Germany
charged that the German department chairman was a propagandist for
Kaiser Wilhelm II. In response, the university\'s board of regents fired
the professor, and the governor vetoed the entire German department
budget for the year.[^131] The controversy at the University of Texas
peaked after the war had officially ended, as did the efforts to
eliminate German from the curriculum in elementary and secondary
schools.[^132] Meanwhile, a distressed Fredericksburg attorney complained
of several instances in which \"men without any German blood in them use
the German language almost entirely,\"[^133] apparently much to his
irritation.

<center>

![Destroy this mad brute' WWI Propaganda Poster 1917-1918](/assets/images/chapters/6/brute.jpg)

**"Destroy this mad brute" WWI Propaganda Poster 1917-1918** [^134]

</center>

If Joseph was concerned about his safety that August 1917, perhaps he
felt somewhat relieved just weeks after moving to Fredericksburg, as
some of the anger of the APL in Texas was directed at blacks. In
Houston, Texas, at Camp Logan, on August 23, 1917, a group of 156 black
soldiers retaliated against racial insults hurled by a group of whites
by using their weapons to attack them, killing 14. Three blacks were
also killed. Later, the army court-martialed 19 of the soldiers and
executed them before their lawyers could file appeals.[^135] Forty-one
others were given life sentences for participating in the mutiny that
had begun after Houston police had stormed into the home of a black
American. The sensational case was tried in San Antonio and Joseph could
not fail to take notice of it. Found guilty, they were told a week later
they were to be hanged but were given no date. Without warning,
scaffolding was constructed that very night and all were awakened at
five the morning and hanged simultaneously, one minute before
sunrise.[^136] When the San Antonio *Inquirer*, an African-American
newspaper, carried an article criticizing the execution, its editor was
indicted and found guilty of "attempting to cause insubordination,
disloyalty, mutiny, and refusal of duty." Although he was out of the
state and claimed to have known nothing about the article, he was
sentenced to two years in the Leavenworth prison.[^137] Joseph did not need
much more to be convinced that he had to be very careful with his
comments. Once he had written home that he had become so annoyed at the
constant attacks and innuendos thrown toward him regarding Germany's
conduct that he simply refused to acknowledge them. These executions
were a compelling reason for refusing to comment. Fortunately, Germans
were not quite at the bottom rung of the pecking order, but there was
little room for comfort. Joseph's newly adopted country was at war and
taking its role very seriously. He had made his move away from Hamilton
just in time, for President Wilson soon made it illegal for any alien to
change his residence. Joseph had to stay in Fredericksburg for the
duration of the war whether he wanted to or not.

When the United States entered the war in May 1917, there were 4.6
million people living within the national boundaries who were born in
countries that were aligned with the Central Powers.[^138] By the end of
that month, the Justice Department had compiled a list of 11,770 who
were suspected of violating neutrality laws. Joseph could see that his
presence in Hamilton became more and more obvious to many. He had to
have felt some fear that on any day he might be singled out. President
Wilson's attorney general seemed overly eager to spread distrust for
Germans when he announced, \"There are a very large number of German
citizens in this country who are dangerous and are plotting trouble, men
from whom we must necessarily expect trouble promptly of a sinister sort.
"[^139] Comments like these prompted the arrests of sixty-three
suspects immediately upon the declaration of war. Under presidential
warrant, a total of 6,300 German Americans were arrested during the
period of United States military involvement in World War I, of whom
most were paroled, but 2,300 of them were interned by military
authorities.[^140] It was not an ideal time to be German or to stand out
from the crowd. Joseph was already a suspect because he was ostracized
by his own relatives who teased him unmercifully over Germany's actions.
Also, everyone in Hamilton had spotted the stranger who was living in
their midst and had hung out his law shingle. All that could change in
an instant. Some might have noticed that the stranger living in their
midst, who, if truly a cousin to Vincent, had never been brought into
the circle of the family. So what if he had studied in the office of a
local and well-respected attorney? Wasn't that just a perfect cover to
hide as a spy?

As the war progressed, many German-Americans now found that they were
harassed and mistreated like never before.[^141]To many Americans, the
German-Americans seemed to represent a clear and present danger that
undermined the national unity needed to fight the war.[^142] Perhaps
Americans were really not as different from our European cousins as we
have liked to think.[^143] How had America, a nation of immigrants who had
helped forge this great nation, been so very ready to turn on one of the
largest immigrant groups to settle in the United States? Nativistic
thinking had a long history in the United States, but during the period
1917-1918, it was blown into grotesque proportions.[^144] And, when during
the Second World War, tens of thousands of innocent Americans can be
removed and imprisoned in concentration camps by an executive order
claiming the right to do so in the interest of national security, we
should not be surprised that Americans participated so eagerly in
extracting vengeance on German-Americans during the First World War. It
had a broad government sponsorship and its wholeheartedly enthusiastic
support. Several thousand vocal opponents of the war were imprisoned
before the war was over.[^145] It reached deep into every facet of American
life and even deeper into a rural Texas town where Joseph's luck finally
ran out.

State and local councils were quickly encouraged officially to
concentrate on the alleged threat posed by German-Americans in their
neighborhoods. The Texas legislature created the Texas State Council of
Defense in May, 1917. At the county level, county judges appointed
council members to over two hundred county councils of defense (CCD).[^146]
Claiming that German-Texans\' ethnicity was equivalent to disloyalty,
many council of defense members in Texas were determined to purge all
traces of German culture from their state. German-language newspapers
were immediately targeted because of the rhetorical support these papers
had given the Central Powers prior to 1917 and because the
German-language press played an important role in sustaining German
ethnicity.[^147] Many considered these as the seeds of dissension and as
working against the United States government. These people should be
prosecuted, imprisoned, and even shot if necessary. Others thought there
was not a state in the Union that was not infested with German spies,
who did not hesitate to spread German propaganda at every opportunity,
which was the most villainous, barbarous, and extensive menace that the
country had to cope with.[^148] The simple, yet often overlooked fact that
suspected enemy aliens could be denied their right of habeas corpus and
arrested by presidential warrant and not by warrant from a judge or
justice of the peace allowed the Justice Department, which was a cabinet
level office, to conduct searches and investigations of anyone whom they
suspected of being disloyal, even with no real evidence of such
activities.[^149] Joseph finally reached a decision. He had to leave the
area and find safety in a community that would provide him more
protection.

And so it was a hot, blustery, late August afternoon in 1917 when Joseph
Benedict Wieser arrived aboard the San Antonio, Fredericksburg, and
Northern Railway's Special from San Antonio at the newly erected depot
in Fredericksburg. Gone were his Van Dyke[^150] and the silk, pop-up top
hat that had been so in vogue in the Europe that he had left behind. The
hat had long been relegated to his standing closet in his sweltering
one-room apartment in Hamilton as had his one and only coat, his heavy,
woolen coat with its long tails. Now in his third year in Texas, he had
learned to adapt to the Texas heat. But this August, the state had been
in the grips of an intense heat wave. Additionally, the year was shaping
up to be one of the driest years on record for many parts. College
Station, Texas would record 26 consecutive days of temperatures over 100
degrees with 5 of those days reaching temperatures higher than 106
degrees.[^151] Joseph had already discovered that Texas temperatures and
weather could vary drastically.[^152] Also in another August, in 1915, just
one year after arriving at Galveston, a massive hurricane had pounded
that city, killing 275 persons and causing \$50 million in property
damage with winds in excess of 120 mph. A 16-foot storm surge tested the
newly built Galveston seawall for the first time.[^153] August, Joseph
learned, could be highly unpredictable, but certainly Joseph felt safer
in this part of Texas. If only the higher elevation eliminated some of
the humidity he had endured so far in San Antonio and Hamilton! Here the
air was definitely fresher, albeit still quite warm. And much of the
patriotic heat he had feared in Central Texas appeared to be much more
abated here.

Joseph had already left several cities and towns behind him. He was now
investigating another, one that was settled by an impressive
colonization effort of which he had heard. Here he was experiencing
changes from the Texas to which he had grown accustomed. This place,
however, was different from any other city or town he had visited. It
might become his home. Time would decide later, but for now he had
decided that he would no longer be known as Joseph. In this remote
valley of the Texas Hill Country, he was now to simply call himself
"J.B."

Disappointed and even uncertain about his future in America, he had
chosen to investigate the little hamlet of which he had heard so much
and had been unable to visit until now simply because he had been
concentrating on his studies in San Antonio, completing his work for
securing a law degree, and working in Dublin to save some money. The war
in Europe had caused tensions across his newly adopted nation, as well
as in Texas, to escalate beyond reasonable civil discourse. There came
to the surface an element of Americans who were turning daily more
hostile toward anything German and anyone German. Encouraged by the
Wilson Presidency, anything German was being attacked as unpatriotic and
un-American. Being German was simply not a good thing to be in the
summer of 1917. As J.B. would later relate, "There were only two native
Germans living in Hamilton[^154] at that time, and when one was lynched one
night, I thought it a good time to leave." It had not mattered that J.B.
had already registered for the American draft and volunteered for the
army. Nor did it matter that he had also filed an application for
citizenship. A wave of nativism was resurrected across America as had
not been witnessed since the Mexican War. Thus a feeling of security
enveloped him as he stepped onto the depot's platform late that August evening. This place, its
buildings, and its people looked and sounded German. Had he found a new
home?

<center>

![J. B. Wieser -- Passport Photograph](/assets/images/chapters/6/jb.jpg)

**J. B. Wieser -- Passport Photograph** [^155]

</center>

It was not difficult for him to leave the Hico-Hamilton-Dublin, Texas
area. His hands were calloused and toughened from months of unloading
box cars of coal, standing guard as a night watchman, and relegated to a
status of a common laborer responsible for such important duties as
cleaning out his Uncle Vincent's factory's outhouses. On the other hand,
his indifference to his cousins was secured now after three years of
snide remarks and humiliating ridicule. His months of study and extreme
frugal living had exhausted him. Now he had a chance to make his months
of study pay off. Only after mastering English, perfecting his Spanish,
and taking additional accounting courses did J.B. acquire skills that
any of his uncle's many operations could use. After almost three years
in America, he had finally risen to head bookkeeper and chief financial
officer of the Hamilton Mill & Elevator Co. However, his Uncle
Vincent [^156] had died in the spring of 1915 just months after J.B.
finished his schooling. He knew then that his future did not lie with
his cousins, but as he settled back into life in the Central Texas towns
of Hamilton and Hico, he resolved to keep all his options open. To
insure a future change of employment, he continued his studies. He would
keep his distance from them, not that they had had a change of heart and
had now begun to include him in their family activities. It had been
difficult for them to witness J.B. kneeling and crying at Vincent's
funeral. They would see what he had learned and how productive he might
be at doing office work. Consequently, J.B. now began employment with
them as a bookkeeper.

His Uncle Vincent, J.B. later wrote, had become his only friend in
America. He met Vincent Wieser in 1910, when Vincent, traveling alone,
came home to Volkertshausen, the little German village of his birth in 1837. Vincent befriended the young J.B. during that visit and it was the reason that four years later brought J.B. to Texas. The affection and
assistance given him by his uncle was not assumed nor approved of by his
uncle's family. They had resented J.B. from the first day of his arrival
and the indifference toward their new European cousin increased after
the death of Vincent in 1915. However, J.B. was now armed with a
bachelor's of laws, earned through correspondence and after study under
Hamilton attorney, Harvey Chesley, Sr. J.B. had received his degree from
LaSalle's Extension University on July 20, 1917 in a scant four months.
So confident was he of his ability to graduate and pass the Texas Bar
that before the day of his graduation, he had already printed his
personal stationary.[^157]

The February 1917 edition of LaSalle University's Personal Efficiency
Magazine announced it graduates and which former students had
successfully passed their state's bar examinations. J.B. had taken time
to write to them previously that he had quit his job at the Hamilton
mill and had devoted fulltime to the study. His study was done, of
course, at Harvey Chesley, Sr.'s office. [^158]

<center>

![Personal Efficiency](/assets/images/chapters/6/pe.jpg)

</center>

The magazine was full of subtle suggestions on how to succeed and how to
improve one's chances in practice, especially in this issue on making
speeches. J.B. was the only graduate from Texas in this issue. This
issue not only listed J.B. among those passing their bar examinations in
their respective states, but included a separate article on J.B.'s
correspondence with the University and noted a previous letter written
to the university as he set out to study law. [^159]

<center>

![LaSALLE men pass bar examination](/assets/images/chapters/6/la1.jpg)

![LaSALLE men pass bar examination](/assets/images/chapters/6/la2.jpg)

![LaSALLE men pass bar examination](/assets/images/chapters/6/new.jpg)

</center>


[^160] J.B. was undoubtedly proud of his accomplishment and in the short amount
of time in which he not only completed his law degree, but in the speed
in which he was admitted to the Texas Bar. He immediately hung out his
shingle in Hamilton, obviously with the support of a proud Hervey
Chesley, Sr.'s encouragement. J.B. had succeeded at something. The
problem now was whether he had time to become established before
national events caught up with the people who lived in Hamilton. But,
anti-German incidents were increasing daily throughout the United States
and Texas. And, it would only be a matter of time before such hostility
would soon envelop the little Central Texas town of Hamilton. The fact
that it was also deep in the heart of an area that would spawn one of
the most feared and radical Ku Klux Klan territories in the state did
not provide much opportunity for escaping the wrath of those who also
opposed anyone born in a foreign country or Catholic for that matter.

Meanwhile, within months President Wilson would make it illegal for him
to relocate anywhere. If he wished to leave, J.B. had better have
something in mind quickly and so it occurred to him that he might follow
up on a previous attempt at employment with the Department of State. He
was, after all, fluent in three languages. He just might be of some use
to the United States. Consequently, shortly after passing his bar he
mailed the following letter to the Department of State in Washington D.
C. If he were not successful this time, he would leave Hamilton and move
to an area with more Germans and do so before President Wilson's new
restrictions would find him forced to remain in Hamilton for the
duration of the war or until his citizenship was finally approved,
though he was not eligible for final granting of citizenship until 1920.

<center>

![Consular 1](/assets/images/chapters/6/jb1.jpg)

![Consular 2](/assets/images/chapters/6/jb2.jpg)


</center>

Joseph did not have to wait long for an answer. The postal service was
apparently much quicker at that time and within four days, which is
remarkable since the letter was dated only 4 days after being mailed in
Hamilton. Joseph was mailed an answer by the department. It was curt and
indifferent. There may have been a reason for that considering the
anti-German rhetoric being led by President Wilson, but what could J.B.
have really expected?

<center>

![Return](/assets/images/chapters/6/return.jpg)


</center>


[^161] It is quite likely that the response that J.B. received was also in a
matter of days. Washington's denial of his services was all that he
needed to make his move. His future did not lie in Hamilton and without
his friendship with Hervey Chesley; there was nothing to keep him there.
He had completed his agreement to stay for a while, and now he felt it
was time to move on before it became too late. At the time he arrived in
Fredericksburg, J.B. had not yet lived in the United States the required
amount of time to qualify for citizenship. He had filed his application
with the Bexar County District Clerk on April 22, 1915 while studying in
San Antonio, which meant that he could not be granted citizenship until 1920. However, since April 4, 1917, a few weeks before filing his application, the United States had been at war with his native country.
J.B. was now classified as an enemy alien, and being an alien living in
a country with which the United States was engaged in war was not a good
thing. For his practice in Hamilton, only weeks old, he had hardly had
sufficient time to establish. Fredericksburg might be a safer place to
ride out the tide of the anti-German sentiment sweeping the nation to
which Texas was no longer immune.

The four-year old San Antonio, Fredericksburg, and Great Northern
Railway Depot, a small wooden-framed structure, appeared as if it was
obviously owned by a railroad that was severely underfunded. Other towns
had built magnificent themed depots trumpeting the triumph of what a
railroad brings to a community. Fredericksburg had finally, after trying
since 1884, been linked to the world by rail only in 1913, and that was
considered progress; however, that link came quite late in its history,
for the community had suffered from a lack of forward-thinking leaders
for decades. The wealth just had not yet followed. The depot was located
south of town in an area still surrounded by small fields and dotted
here and there with clusters of post oaks, whose dust-laden branches
arched skyward against a hot, cloudless sky as the last rays of a summer
sun were nearing an end of their blistering journey on this hot August
afternoon. Winds were beginning at last to give some slight evidence of
stirring, but by all indications, it was going to be a very hot night.
Baron's Creek, a small creek that ran parallel to the new railroad,
separated the new depot from the rest of town, and only a simple
low-water, wooden bridge linked the new depot south of still vacant
fields that were found along the southern banks of the creek.

All of Texas was experiencing an oil boom in the second decade of the
new 20th century. That was also apparent even here in the remote reaches
of the Pedernales Valley by the number of newly built fuel depots
located along the southern portions of the railroad track at its
western-most end.[^162] The age of the automobile was about to change the
landscape of Fredericksburg as it was already changing that of America.
It was being heralded by the numerous filling stations that were
springing up along San Saba Street[^163] that were serving the growing number of local citizens and
travelers whose automobiles now appeared with more frequency on the
city's dusty, hard-packed dirt streets as they headed to El Paso and
points west. Soon the boom for securing oil leases would hit the sleepy
community like a feeding frenzy. It was an opportunity for local
citizens to participate in the oil boom albeit if for many it was only
in operating a service station. Eventually, more than 50 would be
located along San Saba Street. The oil boom fever would even catch J.B.
in short order, but on this night the sight of those oil storage depots
at the end of the tracks meant nothing to him.

As J.B. had boarded the train in San Antonio, he had heard an occasional
German word carelessly spoken by some who had not thought of the
advancing implications and restrictions against speaking German that
were beginning to settle in all across the state. Then, cautiously at
first, then more and more frequently as the train distanced itself from
the city, he heard more German being spoken and upon entering the
station in Fredericksburg, it was all German. He had even enjoyed
friendly conversations with fellow passengers, and upon arriving he was
feeling quite at home, but he left open to himself the question as to
whether he would remain here. It was a decision that he was not to
decide quickly. He would take his time. And, it would take years.

Bringing only a small valise with him at this time, he easily stepped
off the train without having luggage in tow. He had already asked on
board if anyone knew of a place where he might find a room with
furnished meals. He prefaced such inquires by stating that his finances
could not afford the luxury of staying at the famous Nimitz Hotel.[^164]
Arriving finally at the depot, it was late, and he was now in a hurry
simply to find a warmed supper and room for the night. The temperature
had cooled seemingly at a rate almost equal to that of the increasing
elevation. The climate here, even in late summer, was quite different
from that that he has experienced in Central Texas. Fredericksburg lay
three times the elevation of San Antonio and consequently, it was much
less humid than San Antonio. The passenger car's opened windows had
provided scant cooling, as soot and cinders of black smoke occasionally
wafted through the car as it ascended slowly, but steadily, and wove
itself into the heart of The Texas Hill Country. Advised by some, he was
told to inquire at the establishment of Katherine (Lena) Zimmermann,[^165]
who, along with her husband Otto, operated a boarding house on West San
Antonio Street.

J.B. quickly confirmed directions and promptly started out on foot to
reach the northern side of Baron's Creek, where flickering lights
generated by numerous kerosene lamps were beginning to fill one by one
the windows of the houses across the creek with a warm, welcoming glow.
Meanwhile, the pockets of warm air now and then were stirred by a
whirlwind of dry, dusty grasses and caused him to quicken his pace. As
he walked, he began to think about what sort of accommodations this
small town might afford him on his meager budget. Texas had taught him
to accept an even a more simplified frontier style than he had known in
Europe. His experience in Hico, Dublin, and San Antonio had shown him
that in America everyone was equal, and a pedigree, no matter how flimsy
or imagined, was really insignificant and immaterial. If he felt at ease
in Fredericksburg, he would return to Hamilton, close his struggling law
office, gather his few worldly possessions into his two matching steamer
trunks [^166] with which he had arrived in Galveston a few years earlier,
and might just call this small German town in Texas his new home. For
the time being, however, it was hard to think of practical things.

As the stone houses built by the earlier settlers began to come into his
view, he was reminded more and more of the promises that his late Uncle
Vincent had spoken about awaited those who worked hard. These were
sturdy, substantial houses of hand-hewn limestone that indicated
instantly to J.B. the mastery of the skills of the early German
stonemasons. Here settled a people firmly establishing roots in this
Texas wilderness still dominated by Comanches and intending to survive
and build their own future. Here now were the homes of second and third
generation German families demonstrating that they had survived and
taken the opportunities that America offered. J.B. noticed as well, the
smaller, doll-like, wooden framed houses which lined the streets;
sometimes seemingly as if stuck in here and there between more
substantial houses. He would later learn how they came to be called
Sunday houses. Many were obviously standing vacant, this being a
Wednesday and evidenced by the absence of any light from their windows,
as if silently waiting for their owners to return on the weekends with
time to do their shopping and attend church. The neatness, albeit
nothing like what we see today, impressed him. Many were fenced with
what some would have called Victory Gardens[^167] in their front yards and
reinforced in J.B.'s mind the fact that every square inch of space
should be utilized. These gardens were not part of the insane rush to
demonstrate patriotism that swept across American. Behind others stood
chicken coops and an occasional pen for a family cow. The bleating of a
hungry calf here and there filled his ears with a welcoming sound that
reminded him of his home. This was no Hico! This was no Dublin or
Hamilton! This could be home!

How he longed for a house and land of his own! Fredericksburg was so
unlike other Texas small towns to which he had grown accustomed. In
Hamilton and Hico, all houses were essentially built of wood and
obviously not intentionally as well-kept as here. There, such structures
were temporary abodes of a restless generation whose every intention was
that of moving on. Here it was obvious that their owners intended to
stay. Here their owners were home even if an ocean lay between them and
their former homeland. Here he could decipher the permanence of a way of
life even as these images were being swept away by the approaching night
that followed a typical Texas summer's sunset, silhouetted with a new
moon that itself was quickly fading as the town was being enveloped by a
darkness that swallowed whole streets in a pitch blackness, a darkness
that was here and there beginning to be broken by what appeared to be an
endless number of evening conversations of the residents of the homes
that lined the streets. With their work done for the day, the night
belonged to those who sought conversation and a moment of rest in the
coolness of the outdoors. There to catch the first evening gulf breezes
that arose, there to sit around a bucket of smoldering chips whose smoke
kept mosquitoes at bay, and there to talk quietly of the day's
accomplishments and share some last thoughts with their children or with
their neighbors. A true feeling of Gem√ºdlichkeit[^168] was evident to J.B.

His mind raced to memories of home whenever he found himself alone. Once
he had written to his mother in a rare sharing of his feelings in which
he acknowledged the encouragement she had given him to succeed and
survive. But, that was then. The next two years had changed his
circumstances. His only friend in America, Uncle Vincent, was dead. Now
he had a new opportunity in a country that abounded with opportunity,
another chance to succeed. J.B. quickly headed west beyond the end of
the tracks from the depot to the street that would take him north to San Antonio Street, for
it provided the only access across Barons Creek with a narrow wooden
bridge that spanned, if barely, the babbling sounds of running water en
route to joining the waters of the Pedernales somewhere to the east.
After climbing the high bank on the northern side, he turned west and
soon discovered that the town's blocks running east to west were twice
as long as normal typical city blocks to which he had grown accustomed.
His three-block walk west on San Antonio proved to be equal to at least
six normal city blocks. He noticed how wide these streets were.
Americans have so much room. He quickened his pace. He would have to
endure more walking before arriving at his destination, 415 West San
Antonio.

There, nestled on the southern side of the street near the bottom of a
small hill, just a block west from the St. Mary's Catholic Church, stood
a two-story, wooden house with a long front porch that spanned all
across the street side of the building.[^169] The front door stood opened
to the street this evening, welcoming any breeze that might blow through
the house. Only a screened door framed with scrolls prevented entry. He
could see the guests inside already seated at supper. After knocking, a
young girl, one of the daughters of the owners, motioned him in. He
introduced himself to Lena and announced that he had been told he could
find a room with meals at her establishment. However, he added, first he
wanted to test her cooking before he committed to taking a room. Would
she oblige him and allow him to join them in supper? He would pay, of
course, for his meal. What Lena may have thought of the brash gentleman
who had just dropped in on this hot summer evening just in time to join
other paying guests at this boarding house is not known, but Lena being
only 12 years his senior, would eventually develop a very special
relationship with J.B. that would last until her death some thirty-two
years later. They would actually come to like one another. How much Lena
may have reminded J.B. of his mother will also never be known, but here
was a woman, like his mother, who knew nothing but hard work and giving
of herself to please others.

J.B. also did not escape the attention of one of Lena's daughters,
Estella, who at 16 had thoughts, as all girls her age had from time to
time, wondering whom she would marry. She shared these thoughts with her
older sister, Louise, who at 25 and still unmarried, may have already
lost hope of finding that certain someone, and it may have been the
cause of her bouts of depression. Perhaps, Louise had had the same
thoughts about the gentleman who this night came to live with them.
Little did Estella suspect that night that she would find her beau
knocking on her front door. For four years, Estella had helped her
mother run her boarding house, having finally been forced to drop out of
school after completing only the sixth grade to earn money mainly by
picking cotton. She had been doing that since her mother sent her out
into the fields at the age of six. Likewise, what J.B. obviously could
not have known at the time is that he had just introduced himself to his
future mother-in-law and had met his future wife. But, his thoughts were
not on Estella that evening. As he finished his meal, he folded his
napkin and nodded approval. Now and only now did he inquire about a
place to sleep. Tomorrow, he had resolved would be the beginning of a
new adventure.

The next morning was a new start. Perhaps it would not be as hot. The
Hill Country mornings could actually be quite cool even after an
unseasonable hot day, and this morning proved to be no exception. The
morning was a welcomed experience for Lena's guests. A full breakfast
that included eggs, bacon, biscuits and home-baked bread, butter, coffee
and jelly awaited J.B. Today he would begin assessing his situation. He
would explore town and its potential and then focus on deciding whether
this town would suffice and satisfy his immediate needs. He was also
unaware that his situation would at times become far worse, not better
in the immediate future.[^170] But first, he had other things with which to
contend and having found his accommodation for the night to his
satisfaction, he inquired about staying on. Lena's quick approval
settled that question for now.

Beginning a new law practice was not easy, and he had given it little
opportunity in Hamilton to develop. Circumstances had changed in the
less than four weeks since hanging out his shingle. He had no choice; he
needed to consider another city. Normally, it helped if one understood
and knew the local citizens by growing up among them, going to school
with them, and being related and having friends. People have a tendency
to choose their counsel from among those they know and trust. J.B. may
also have had an air about him that emanated from years of telling
himself to hold his head up high and believing that he was somewhat
better than others. That he was intelligent, there can be no question,
but intelligence often makes others uncomfortable. His friend in
Hamilton had known him, but in Fredericksburg, J.B. was a complete
stranger and a stranger in a town that, he would soon realize, did not
readily accept newcomers, even one who had been born in Germany and who
now wanted to live among them. The majority of the settlers had arrived
in Fredericksburg in the decade following its founding, that period
having occurred some 50-60 years before J.B.'s arrival. Anyone not
descending from these founding families was and remained an outsider for
the rest of their lives.

J.B. would feel intense stares from these descendants the first time he
attended Sunday mass at the newly-built St. Mary's Catholic Church that
stood stately next to the first Catholic church that had been built by
the pioneers from hand-quarried limestone in 1852, both of which he had
discovered were only a block from where he now resided. It had given him
comfort knowing that here he would find Catholics. In Hico and Hamilton
there was no Catholic Church, a fact that had concerned Vincent, who
compensated by having a priest come to his home from time to time to
hold Mass.

Attending Mass for the first time, J.B. felt that those sitting in their
rightful pews stared intensely at the new stranger occupying one of
their pews and participating in their services without first seeking
their permission. Many may have wondered by what right that stranger
felt that he could receive the sacraments of their church. He soon was
accompanied by one or more of the Zimmermann's children, but it did not
prevent the obvious expressions of annoyance.[^171] Later, J.B. would
reflect that it was for that very reason he finally quit going to church
and ended his association with the Catholic Church forever. Sunday after
Sunday he was greeted only with stares as the local townspeople watched
his every move and spoke in whispers to one another about the new
stranger in their midst and "the German" staying at Lena's
boardinghouse. By Christmastime, the only time of the year during which
he became quite nostalgic, he had had enough. He would forever set aside
his Rosary, but quitting would cost him any chance of winning any
Catholic clients, for Catholics, more so than any other group in this
town, had a tendency to patronize one of their own.[^172] If he were to
remain, he had to win the confidence of enough citizens to support his
practice. He had just made his road more difficult and far more lonesome
than he could have imagined.

Until now, he had made no real friends in Texas save for Harvey
Chesley,[^173] and it did not help that he appeared to lack the ability to
really make friends. His demeanor was cold and he may have preferred to
present that image to others. Except for Hervey Chesley, Sr., under whom
he had been permitted to study law, he had no one with whom he cared to
remain in contact from the Hamilton, Hico, or Dublin area. He had
stopped writing and sending postcards to his friends in Europe when he
immigrated. Now he was considering ending his ties with those in
Hamilton and Hico. Additionally, since the outbreak of war, it became
impossible for letters to get through the blockade of Germany by England
and France. Chesley had permitted him to use his law books, although it
is unknown what J.B. paid Chesley for his help. Nevertheless, Chesley
would never be cut from his list of friends although there was little
contact between them after moving from Hamilton. For now, however, he
was scouting the town and its people, exploring available office space
and, of course, testing the cooking. If there was any certainly about
J.B. at this time, it was that he could not return to the Hamilton area
as long as the war continued between the United States and the Kaiser's
Reich.

J.B. found and rented a small office upstairs in the Gold Building at
136 East Main. It was centrally located and close to everything and
everyone who might be important. He hung out his shingle and ran his
first advertisement in the September 16th, 1917 edition on the front
page of *TheFredericksburg Standard* right opposite that of Alfred P. C.
Petsch,[^174] a local lawyer with whom he would spend a lifetime opposing
in court and politics. He was ready to make his fortune, but it would
not be easy. In days he returned to Hamilton to collect the last of his
belongings that included the two steamer trunks in which he had brought
everything he owned and valued from Germany. He was not, however,
certain that he would not return there, and he retained his doubts about
staying in Fredericksburg for most of the next six years.

J.B. had to work at making friends, but that does not mean that he did
not make friends. He could come across as being arrogant, for also being
intelligent had its drawbacks. J.B. could be very blunt and outspoken,
which some admired and others resented, but above all else, he was
completely honest. Certainly, there were a few who enjoyed his company,
and many engaged him in debates. The town did not suffer from a dearth
of individuals who loved nothing better to do than talk. And, J.B. loved
to engage in storytelling. It was all part of what lawyers had to do to
win clients at that time, become known, set an example and high
standards, stay visible and be accessible when needed. But, use of such
time for telling stories meant that little money was coming in while
rent, lodging, and meals continued daily.

He was still a dapper dresser with a flair for fashion that he had not
entirely abandoned in America. Clean, crisp white shirts, stiff, very
stiff collars, ties that required stick pins, pressed pants, garters for
his socks, a nice coat, and a Stetson still mattered to him, for he knew
appearances mattered, but it did cost money. His ledgers show that he
shopped at the local haberdasheries frequently, and he kept up with the
fashions to the extent that mattered at the time. The rent for two rooms
of office space continued month after month with or without an income.
Likewise, so did his rent for room and board. J.B. would have to look to
other ventures to supplement his legal career. He continued to advertise
for clients, although it was clearly against the laws that President
Woodrow Wilson had initiated upon a declaration of war against Germany.

From time to time he still considered leaving the legal profession and
going into some kind of business, but establishing a business also
required money. He had none. His uncle was dead, and he could not easily
go back to his cousins without admitting failure. That would have been
very much to their delight, and that he would never admit. J.B. remained
determined to make his fortune in America, but on April 2, 1917,
President Woodrow Wilson had appeared before a joint session of Congress
and asked for a declaration of war against his native Germany. Two days
later Congress honored his request, and J.B. instantly achieved the
status of an enemy alien. Germans across the United States were
questioned about their loyalties to the United States. A witch hunt was
beginning to be unleashed with the approval of the Wilson
administration, the likes of which had not been seen since the American
Revolution and the Civil War. Even in towns such as Fredericksburg,
where Germans should be safe from harassment, those of German descent
had to be careful in all their actions lest they be viewed with
suspicion and disloyalty. By early April 1918, Fredericksburg organized
its own Loyalty League. To no one's surprise, it quickly claimed that a
large number of the population of Gillespie County was of German
descent, but it was shameful that some aliens were living among them who
had not declared their intention of becoming bonafied citizens.[^175] A few
weeks earlier, the February term of the Gillespie County grand jury had
issued a warning that many residents had failed to take out their
naturalization papers and reported to District Judge N. T. Stubbs that
its investigation had shown that at present it believed everyone in
question was as a whole "loyal to our flag and country."[^176] That was not
sufficient for many, and an immediate call went out in the spring of
1918 to organize a Loyalty League in Fredericksburg and Gillespie
County, as required under a new state law, which appointed one of its
own citizens, Ernst C. Hansen[^177] to the post of Loyalty Ranger. They
held their first meeting in the courthouse on May 15, 1918. Many
citizens came forward to be part of it. Shortly thereafter, the grand
jury responded to a state investigation regarding a certain Gillespie
County attorney who was serving as a notary when such activity had been
declared illegal by President Wilson. Other suspicious activities were
continued to be noted by the Loyalty League throughout the summer of 1918.

Many years after the Great War, J.B. related how he had made a mistake
that almost caused his deportation. He had always liked guns and during
his life collected many, not those of the kinds that hunters purchased
and worth hundreds or even thousands of dollars, but just those common,
ordinary rifles and pistols.[^178] How and why he acquired his first pistol
or what kind it was is no longer known. Nevertheless, he had always been
willing and eager to show his acquisitions to those who were interested
and talk about them, but he was also fully aware that as long as the
United States was at war with Germany, he had to be very careful. J.B.'s
office and those of Hansen were both on the second floor of the Gold
Building. There is no doubt that in friendly conversations between
tenants that J.B. felt secure in volunteering that he owned a pistol.
Whether or not J.B. revealed this before the Armistice is not known, but
when the county's loyalty ranger, Hansen, learned of it, he set out to
entrap J.B. It was not until late one November morning in 1918, just
weeks after the start of the Armistice, that Hansen or an accomplice was
finally able to convince J.B. to bring his pistol to a prearranged
public site. Trusting Hansen, J.B. gladly brought it from where he was
boarding to their meeting. It was all Hansen needed. Having heard rumors
of its existence, he had finally enticed J.B. to produce it and, of
course, to bring it, J.B. had to carry it on his person. J.B. had known, of course, that Hansen had been
appointed since July of 1918 as Gillespie County's Special Loyalty
Ranger. It was his duty to keep vigilance and arrest all who were
unpatriotic and disloyal to the United States. Hansen had been trying to
catch J.B. in doing something disloyal ever since he had been sworn in
but had no success. That the Armistices had been agreed to and that the
Great War was over did not faze him now. He had intended to catch J.B.
one way or another before all the restrictions imposed on enemy aliens
during the war were lifted on unnaturalized Germans living in the United
States.

Hansen's business partner was Alfred P. C. Petsch, a local lawyer who
had also just recently returned home from the war as a kind of hero, at
least so he thought. His activities were well-covered by the local
press, both before leaving for his military duty and afterwards, as he
enjoyed a welcome home that few others received. His movements about the
state were duly recorded by *The Fredericksburg Standard* even if only
to let their readers know that he had traveled to San Antonio for the
day.[^179] But Petsch had been somewhat irritated by the brash new lawyer
who had arrived in town and had no qualms with Hansen hatching his
scheme to finally catch J.B. in doing something unpatriotic. Hansen had
planned well and had three witnesses, each of whom would eventually
testify at the trial that they had seen J.B. carrying a pistol on his
person.[^180] Hansen arrested J.B., who was handcuffed and taken
immediately to the county jail. Bond was set at $350.00 while the
extent of his threat to the United States was determined by the county
attorney, J. T. Estill. News of his arrest swept through town.
convincing many that their suspicions about J.B. were well-founded.
Others were shocked and found it unbelievable.

Unquestionably, J.B. immediately discovered that as an attorney, he
certainly should have known better than to carry a weapon about when he
was still technically classified as an enemy alien. He was only months
away from receiving his citizenship. Actually, it was even more
thoughtless than that. Warnings had already surfaced in the local
newspaper the previous spring regarding a certain unnaturalized citizen
practicing law and serving as a notary public. Worse was the public
warning given citizens about seeking out and conducting business with
such enemy aliens. An article even appeared in *The Fredericksburg
Standard* warning people that enemy aliens could not work as notary
publics. Perhaps Hansen had been irritated that he had not been able to
find just cause to arrest J.B. earlier. A public warning was issued at a
meeting in the courthouse to those in the county who continued to take
their business to him and that they were now considered to be
unpatriotic and in violation of the new presidential executive order.[^181]
President Wilson had been dead serious about raising the level of
patriotism in American as dozens of vigilante groups across America were
forcing everyone who spoke German or made a disparaging remark pay for
his transgressions. The President's appeal sounded genuine and sincere
even among many citizens in Gillespie County who had no problem
violating other's constitutional rights of free speech in the name of
patriotism. While there are no records of anyone being forced to kiss
the American flag, or tarred and feathered, or even lynched in Gillespie
County, one was arrested and jailed. J.B.'s arrest was not good for his
practice that he was now finally permitted to resume. While his name was
not mentioned directly in the paper, being so obviously referred to on
the front page of the newspaper was not good for business in a small
town in which it was rather simple to determine to whom the story
pertained. Perhaps a little irritated by the rashness of his business
partner, Mr. Hansen, Alfred P. C. Petsch agreed to act as J.B.'s defense
attorney.

J.B would later say, as he sat in the Gillespie County jail, that it was
the first time that he wept. This was serious even though the war was
over! Now, he was facing prison or deportation. Despite the difficulties
he had faced thus far in America and the uncertainly of staying, he
definitely knew that he did not want to leave. How could he go home? The
British blockade still made that impossible. J.B. would later embellish
the story by claiming to have spent a week in jail in San Antonio, and
that by chance there he had earlier befriended the Belgium Consulate
General. Research has shown that there was no Belgium Consulate General
in San Antonio at that time, and why any Belgium Consulate General
happened to be in San Antonio is difficult to rationalize.[^182] Belgium
was deeply occupied with a war on her soil. While it might seem unlikely
that J.B. actually had had an opportunity to run into such an officer of
that rank, it is not beyond the realm of possibility. While attending
schools in San Antonio, he did, however, get to know and win the trust
of some people with influence.

Even among the citizens in Fredericksburg's very German community, J.B.
still attracted more attention than he desired. Many of the locals
thought he was not one of them. He had not lost his penchant for
dressing well. He was aloof and so he stood out from the local citizens
even as he tried desperately to blend into it. It was as if mixing oil
and water. He was different! As he would all his life, he possessed
sufficient self-confidence knowing that he was intelligent and that if
he worked hard, he was going to succeed. He cared little what others
thought. Perhaps, he also thought that he was a little better than
everyone else, although he would never say so. He knew that he had no
reason to feel inferior as long as he did not reveal his past.

It can be surmised that J.B. presented the best performance of his life
at his trial in February of 1919 and convinced those who sat in judgment
of him that he was not guilty of the indictment. A twelve-member jury
heard the testimony of the three witness plus that of Ernst C. Hansen,
and then voted to acquit J.B. of the charges. J.B. was found to be
innocent and now a free man.[^183] Petsch had a lot of facts with which to
convince the District Judge that J.B. was innocent and that J.B. had
taken a number of positive steps toward becoming a citizen since his
arrival in 1914. Among things that he could use in his defense were that
J.B. had actually made an application seeking an appointment as a
Consular Clerk in an American Mission or Consulate on August 14, 1916.
About a year later and about three months before moving to
Fredericksburg, he had written to the Secretary of State in Washington
D. C. requesting an assignment with that department and offered their
acknowledgement as proof. It also did not hurt him that in that
application he noted that he had applied but had been denied acceptance
in a Reserve Officers Training Camp at Leon Springs, Texas because of a
slight physical defect.[^184] Unless they were going to charge him for
being a spy, the actions taken by J.B. since immigrating demonstrated
clearly that they were among those that could be considered appropriate
of any loyal abiding citizens, or on the other hand, he had been so
smart as to establish an excellent cover as a secret German agent.
Additionally, he had filed for citizenship on April 22, 1915 with the
United States District Court in San Antonio, at which time he renounced
his allegiance to the Kaiser and the German Reich. He had mastered
English in less than a year, spoke Spanish and Italian fluently and a
smattering of French, had earned a law degree from an American
University, and had been admitted to the Texas Bar. Certainly, these
were steps beyond what one would think a spy would do just to protect his cover. It
was clearly obvious that J.B. intended to become an American citizen. He
had even purchased his first parcel of land in 1916, albeit it being
located in a far remote corner of the Big Bend region of Texas. And, in
a few years, J.B. would challenge J. T. Estill for his job as county
attorney.

Since that November of 1918, J.B. had been out on bail, but after the
trial J.B. might have been a free man, but he knew that from that day
forward, he would have to be very, very careful if he intended to
continue living there. Among the citizenry of Fredericksburg were those
who were certainly disappointed, did not trust the stranger who had
settled among them, and would relish seeing him arrested again. Although
defended by Petsch, they would not become friends. Petsch also had to
restore some kind of creditability with his business partner, Hansen. It
would not be a good arrangement for both J.B. and Petsch to have their
office in the Gold Building. There were just too many opportunities for
them to run into each other. Many in town might have been quite annoyed
that J.B. had succeeded in avoiding a guilty verdict and possible
deportation this time. Strangely, besides having possessed a pistol, he
had given his enemies an additional opportunity for arresting him, but
none caught it during the war.

Federal law prohibited enemy aliens from seeking work or engaging in
work within the United States during the time that the United States was
at war. J.B. could not legally keep his practice open to practice law or
be hired to work for anyone. Ranger Hansen had failed to catch J.B. on
that even though he ran his ads on the front pages of the *Wochenblatt*
and *The Fredericksburg Standard*. J.B. was clearly practicing law
throughout 1917-1918 and doing so quite openly. More amazingly, even the
newspaper had published notice that certain local alien attorneys (only
J.B. was known to fit that description) could not serve as notaries. How
Hansen had missed this is anyone's guess. Much of J.B.'s legal work was
done by references from those who, despite some local sentiment, trusted
his advice and legal work. Additionally, aliens were also forbidden to
travel and could not travel outside the United States, not even to
Mexico. Since all correspondence with his mother and sister ceased until
after the end of the war, there is little to track his activities during
the balance of the Great War. Beginning in 1919, however, his ledgers
and account books will reveal how he earned money and with whom he
established contacts at least to some extent.

J.B. had already bought his first parcel of land, forty acres in West
Texas in 1916. Now, he discovered the "oil business," a fever that
affected every Texan. As a trained bookkeeper, an accountant, and CFO of
the Hamilton Mill and Elevator Company, he kept meticulous records. He
recorded every check or payment, he recorded every deposit and noted
every legal document, and for whom he performed work as he settled in to
establishing a practice in his newly adopted town and at least his home
for the near future. Despite all the difficulties J.B. claimed he had
endured at the hands of Uncle Vincent's children, it is quite clear from
these records that he traveled back and forth between Hamilton and
Fredericksburg a number of times and that some positive contacts were
made between them, including J.B. performing additional work for them in
sales. It is additional evidence that he had not yet decided whether he
was to remain in Fredericksburg.

His ledgers and letters reveal that he traveled to Mexico, Cuba, and
Europe between 1919 and 1922 while using Fredericksburg as his home base
and continuing to rent his room at Lena Zimmermann's boarding house. As
the Great War finally ended, J.B., now a citizen, was free to travel
once again. J.B. became an international salesman, put his Spanish to
good use or tried to, and tried to impress his relatives in Europe that
he, at last, through sacrifices had succeeded in America. He put on a
pretty good performance for his future mother-in-law as well.
Nevertheless, her family apparently quickly grew to admire the brash
young German who had knocked on their door that hot August evening in 1917. J.B. eventually decided to stay, try his hand in the booming oil businesses, and build his law practice. He married and would rear a
family. Fredericksburg became his home.

The Sedition Act of 1918 was an amendment to the Espionage Act of 1917,
passed at the urging of President Woodrow Wilson, who had been concerned
that dissent, in time of war, was a significant threat to the morale of
the country. The passing of this act had forbidden Americans to use "disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language" about the United States government, flag, or armed forces during war. The act had also
allowed the postmaster general to deny mail delivery to dissenters of
government policy during wartime. [^185] Today's liberal Democrats might be
shocked at the freedoms that their party stripped from Americans. The
war fever that swept the United States ignored that freedom of speech
was guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution,
which stated in part, "Congress shall make no law... abridging the
freedom of speech or the press". Nevertheless, the United States
Supreme Court upheld the Sedition Act at the time it was in effect in
Debs v United States, but subsequent Supreme Court decisions have made
it less likely that a similar law would be considered constitutional
today. The Espionage Act made it a crime to help enemies of the United
States, but the Sedition Act made it a crime to simply utter, print,
write, or publish any disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language
about the United States' form of government. Anti-war protesters were
arrested by the hundreds when speaking out against the draft and the
war, but eventually protests simply became illegal under this law. Most
newspapers "showed no antipathy toward the act" and "far from
opposing the measure, the leading papers seemed actually to lead the
movement in behalf of its speedy enactment." [^186] When Joseph found
himself entrapped, he was released from jail not because of the
protection guaranteed by the Constitution, but only because he had
befriended, by chance, the editor of a local Catholic newspaper and son
of a prominent hotel owner while attending classes in San Antonio. That
he had registered for the draft while living in Hamilton and had
traveled to Leon Springs to volunteer, along with Hervey Chesley, Jr.,
for the army might have been meaningless without the support of L.
William Menger, the highly-respected editor of *The Southern
Messenger.* [^187]

Congress repealed the Sedition Act in December 1920, when the war was
finally over, for the United States and the nation clambered for a
return to normalcy. The repeal of the Sedition Act happened quickly
because of its many abuses during World War I, including actions by the
Wilson administration and his postmaster general.[^188] When the war
finally ended on the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh
month of 1918, America did not simply return to the world it had known
before the war, nor did the rest of the world.[^189]Over the next decade
Americans were whipped into rages by the Red Scare that overtook the
anti-German hysteria in mid-1919. [^190] As that died down, the rise of the
second Ku Klux Klan, along with a number of strongly anti-Catholic and
anti-Semitic developments across the country, contributed to the
pervasive sense that America was no longer interested in being a
pluralistic nation but rather sought to enforce a rather strict
homogeneity.[^191] Hico, Dublin, and Hamilton, Texas became the center
of a strong Ku Klux Klan stronghold of Texas. Since J.B. was both a
foreigner and Catholic, he had more good reasons to move from the area.
His first years in the United States continued to be one of utter
amazement for him. He never could have imagined the hysteria that he
would face here.

When war broke out in Europe in August 1914, Joseph had been in Texas
only for five months and had already had his fill of physical work
slaving for the sons of Vincent. He was about to move to San Antonio to
enroll in a business school when one of the most senseless wars ever
contrived was ignited and could not be extinguished. The British
government moved immediately to strangle the supply of raw materials and
foodstuffs to Germany and its allies. This marked the beginning of the
hunger blockade, a war of attrition that did not end on Armistice Day,
but a blockade that lasted until Germany was forced to accept the blame
for the war and signed the Treaty of Versailles in June 1919, almost
eight months following the Armistice.[^192] The British blockade
interrupted much communication between relatives in Germany, and the
absence of correspondence between Joseph and his mother spoke for its
success. For all practical purposes, it was an absolute embargo by the
end of 1916, and it would not be until the blockade was lifted three
years later that Joseph was able to learn how his mother and her family
had fared during the war. The suspense had to be difficult for him, but
he never committed his feeling to paper.

Germany launched an early unrestricted submarine warfare to break the
blockade.[^193] This policy failed, however, and, in contrast, the Allied
blockade of central Europe proved to be a major source of the greater
cost of war to the Central Powers.[^194] The Allied blockade, from 1915-18
and its continuation and extension in 1918-19, was not widely recorded.
It exposed an intensely Anglophile and Francophile family of which most
Americans were unaware, especially of the nature and extent of the
blockade that took place long after Armistices Day.[^195] Although the
First World War ended in November 1918, that became the date only on
which hostilities on land ceased. The Allied Forces (chiefly the
English, but with the acquiesce of the United States) continued the
blockade of all of foodstuffs and other materials from reaching Germany
until July 11, 1919, eight months after the Armistice was signed at
Compiegne. England had continued the blockade in order to force a new
government of Germany, the \"Weimar Republic,\" to ratify the Versailles
\"peace\" treaty that has replaced the Armistice. The blockade
intentionally continued and increased the scarcity of food resulting in
a forced famine that was used as a post-military weapon against the
civilian population of Germany. The longer range effects of the
starvation that resulted from the blockade were of little concern to the
victorious British and the French.[^196] Each fully intended to starve the
German population until they forced their leaders to sign the Armistice.

Joseph may not have been such a proud defender of his native country. He
had served in the Kaiser's reserve, but he also was a keen observer and
critic of the German army's attitude. Unlike the army in the United
States, the German army played a major role in the day-to-day
administration of the Kaiser's Germany. Although foreign sources of food
and fertilizer were cut off when the blockade began, the German
authorities virtually ignored the consequences of a food shortage on
their people. Matters were made considerably worse by the administration
of the food regulations being incredibly decentralized. Under the
provisions of the Prussian Law of Siege, the procurement and
distribution of the domestic food supply was administered by no less
than twenty-four separate German army authorities, under generals who
differed widely in their attitudes and approaches to the problem and who
often worked at cross-purposes from each other and from the overall army
administration.[^197] Much later, in his after-dinner talks, Joseph often
hinted at the prevailing German attitude those in the military had
towards civilians. Those serving in the military simply had more rights
than civilians, a point in which he used an illustration how civilians
had to step off sidewalks and walk in the street when meeting an officer
coming from the opposite direction. Such was the attitude of the
military even in remote villages like Volkertshausen. He had witnessed
it first hand there and again later when he served his time in the
reserves. The German army knew a lot of things about war but had little
interest in some of their assigned duties other than fighting.
Consequently, Germans starved.

In more remote villages, those who knew only farming, villagers such as
the Buhls, were affected with shortages almost as badly as those in the
major cities. Starvation on a farm was also possible, and throughout all
the years of war, Joseph had no knowledge of how his mother and her
family were faring. By 1916 the German population was surviving on a
meager diet of dark bread, slices of sausage without fat, an individual
ration of three pounds of potatoes per week, and turnips. Only the
turnips were in abundant supply.[^198] How Joseph's family survived in
Tuttlingen was not known nor discussed in his subsequence
correspondence. Joseph did hear of their struggles in mid-1919. Until
that time, he could only hope and pray that his family members were not
starving. Of course, Joseph's mother could rely on her sister who lived
on the Gerihof for a supply of fresh vegetables to supplement Anna's
meager earnings. During the war the food shortfall also worsened in
Germany by a drop in domestic production approaching 50%. As men such as
Ernst, Joseph's 16-year old brother, entered the army, draft animals
disappeared from the farms, including those on the Buhlhof and Gerihof,
because they were appropriated for the army; plows were now pulled by
the back-breaking efforts of the farmers. Starvation was responsible for
a quarter million deaths during the war.[^199] The black market disposed of
somewhere between a fifth and a third of all available food while German
businessmen and war profiteers reaped in the money. Prices rose by 250%
while inflation cut real wages by 40%.[^200] By mid-1918, the German army\'s
inefficient handling of the nation's food supply was finally exposed.
The army's food ration was no better than the German public's, and this
scarcity contributed to a growing disaffection among the troops.[^201]
Certainly, it was difficult to maintain loyal troops when the
government's inefficiency was starving them.

Joseph had always written that he wanted his mother to move to the
country. He must have felt that they could return to the Buhlhof or the
Gerihof if they had only asked, but perhaps the manner in which Maria
had been sold into marriage had caused resentment or humiliation that
she could not deal with. Not many families took back their siblings who
had been forced from a farm. Maria's sister had taken her in once, but
her brother certainly did not wish her back. Joseph apparently lived in
denial of how bad his mother's plight had been. His mother had long
since given up directing her family. It was her daughter Anna who made
decisions, and taking her mother back to the Gerihof was out of the
question. They might have a little to eat, but it was not their home.
Ironically, Tuttlingen lay only about forty miles or less from the Swiss
border. They could easily have fled there, but the fear of the
unknown was far too great to overcome. What would they do there?
Moreover, it was unlikely that the Swiss would allow them to cross. They
had already fled once and were fortunate enough to have been taken in at
the Gerihof. For now, they decided to stay in Tuttlingen, which was far
from the front, and whatever lay ahead would face all Germans.

As time passed, it became evident that Germany was going to take drastic
measures to counteract the ill effects of the excessive strain placed
upon the civilian populations, including Joseph's family.[^202] German
bureaucratic inefficiency, harvest failures, labor shortages, and the
Allied squeeze also formed a recipe for black marketeering and
inflation.[^203] The Allied blockade strategy worked effectively. As a
memorandum to the War Cabinet on January 1, 1917 confirmed, just about a
month after Joseph's last letter home, it was noted that very few
supplies were reaching Germany or her allies, either through the North
Sea or through other areas such as Austria\'s Adriatic ports, which were
also subjected to a French blockade.[^204] Armed with contraband lists,
British naval ships spent the war patrolling the North Sea, intercepting
and detaining thousands of merchant ships thought to be harboring cargo
bound for enemy shores. This aggressive display of maritime power
aroused considerable anger in neutral countries, many of which enjoyed
strong trading links with Germany.[^205] Among these neutral nations was
the United States, but because of President Wilson's anti-German
sentiment, it did little to keep neutral.

Contrary to today's prevailing assessment of German capabilities, the
German war effort was poorly organized from the start and did not
improve throughout the war. Unwise priorities were given to industrial
and business interests at the expense of its civilians and farmers.[^206]
The German leadership totally underestimated the vigor with which the
Allies would counter the effects of its submarines, and Germany failed
to appreciate the consequence of America\'s potential addition to the
side of the Allies.[^207] By November 1918, the food shortage in Germany
became catastrophic; the action of England and France in continuing the
blockade, after the cessation of hostilities on land, made it even
worse. Germany, thinking that the blockade would end along with the
fighting, sought an Armistice. Americans thought the war was over too,
but the English and the French had no intention of lifting the blockade.
The German public began to starve because the supplies of actual food,
especially potatoes, grain, and sugar, became unavailable. Fodder, fats,
and fertilizer quickly came to be in very short supply simply because of
the continuation of the blockade. Not only the housewife, but also the
soldier and the prisoner of war were affected.[^208] All this while, the
needed supplies were just offshore.

The British sea lords were concerned with the continual assertion of
their naval power, while the French politicians were more interested
with extracting from the Germans every possible dime of reparations.[^209]
Dozens of German ships, whether freighters or passenger liners, were
given to England, including the SS *Brandenberg*, the ship on which
Joseph had sailed to Texas. Neither nation realized that their era of
empire was also at an end. The United States should have picked up the
mantle of a world power, but Americans chose simply to go home, leaving
two hollow empires to settle the terms of Versailles. The French
government's demands were extended even to the gold reserves held by
the German government, which were desperately needed to pay the American
farmer for the foodstuff which he was now asked to supply. For three
months, eyewitness reports of the horrible situations in Germany failed
to morally move either the Allied commission or the peace negotiators at
Paris. In the end, it finally took a violent outburst of anger from a
future American president to persuade the British prime minister that a
drastic change in Allied policy was urgently needed, but it was not
until March 8, 1919, that the Allies' policy was finally reversed by
the Supreme War Council. [^210] Until that time, no correspondence could be
sent or received between Joseph and his family. The agonizing wait and
the doubts had to be prolonged until the blockade was lifted.

The end result of the blockade and especially of its continuation after
November 11, 1918, was the making of a quagmire. The blockade was
enforced and strengthened after the cessation of hostilities. Perceptive
observers on both sides pointed out the dangers inherent in its
continuation, but England and France refused to listen. That it could
lead only to a complete breakdown of the social order in Germany suited
the Allies just fine. Finally, after months, the situation appeared to
be saved by a last minute relaxation of the blockade on food, but the
longer-term results of the resultant famine were disastrous. Whether one
espoused the psychoanalytical argument that childhood deprivation
fostered irrational behavior in adulthood or the physiological assertion
that widespread malnutrition in childhood led to an impaired ability to
think rationally in adulthood, the conclusion remained the same; the
victimized youth of 1915-1920 became the most radical adherents of
National Socialism that swept Germany in the postwar years.[^211] The
Treaty of Versailles had sown the seeds for a second war with Germany.
Of course, the vicious campaign to stamp out descent in the United
States permitted no discussion of the continued blockade by the British
so their hand was never exposed. For months after the Armistice, the
relief shipments were stopped by the French and British refusal to allow
food to be distributed, even from stocks already unloaded in Europe. The
British and the French would determine how long the blockade was
maintained without advice from the United States. Even German fishing
rights in the Baltic were abrogated.[^212] The housewife, the soldier, and
the German prisoner of war were now all equally affected as the reality
of Germany having sought an armistice began to sink in. The attitude of
the Allies resulted in severe undernourishment and was particularly
telling on the elderly Germans, the young, the expectant, and nursing
mothers. Hundreds of relatives living in the United States lived
day-to-day just as Joseph had done with no knowledge of the fate of
their loved one. This was beyond cruelty and beyond the actions of a
civilized people. But, what could American do?

Starvation or hunger, however, was not the only threat to the German
population. One of the most startling events that transpired in this
period was the Great Influenza Pandemic of 1918. The worldwide
influenza-epidemic had a far greater effect on German mortality.
German's loses were two and one half times greater in that year than in
England.[^213] Now, almost a century later, little is still known of the
causes of this pandemic. The influenza epidemic had a devastating effect
in the U.S. as well. Thousand died in the larger cities. Thousands of
deaths even occurred in Texas. El Paso was particularly hard hit. By
October 8, 1918, the border city had 1,800 case of flu. Three weeks
later, city health officials reported more than 5,000 cases.[^214] The
influenza epidemic left no city or town untouched. Now Joseph had
another fear to worry about. Would he be spared? Nearby San Antonio was
also hard hit and reported 571 deaths in 1918 and 116 in 1919 for a
total of 688. Almost ¬Ω% of its population perished.[^215] If such
percentages were to strike the death toll in a city the size of San Antonio today,
they would equal over 5,000 deaths in the span of a single year.
Remarkably, few biographers elaborated on the epidemic. The great
epidemic was dismissed as quickly as it was mentioned, if at all.[^216]
Yet, this flu killed 100 million people in a year or less. Nothing else - no infection, no war, no famine has ever killed so many in as short a
period. Yet it has never inspired awe, not in 1918 and not since, not
among the citizens of any particular land and remarkably not among the
peoples of the United Sates.[^217] It was far worse than the Great Plague,
yet today is hardly known. It was the final straw that capped the
largest war in the history of man. Perhaps people simply sought to erase
it from their minds as if it never happened. It was mentioned and spoken
of later even in Joseph's household from time to time in reference to
whole families that died in Fredericksburg, often within days during its
epidemic. Joseph could not have escaped it by having moved to
Fredericksburg. He arrived first and the pandemic struck months later in
the early months of 1918. Not until 1919 had it run its course. It had
struck every city worldwide. It was just one more thing contributing to
the doubts for his family's safety over which he had no control. He had
grown indifferent, and so for months on end, Joseph never knew if any of
his family in Germany had fallen in the war or had been stricken by the
influenza.

By 1920 German-American voters had largely turned to the Republican
Party because of bitter disillusion with how the Wilson administration
had run the country during the national crisis.[^218] The
Fredericksburg-Germans, however, had turned to the Republican Party
after the Civil War. Now, thousands of Americans were reeling from the
hate campaign waged from the White House that had encouraged a feeding
frenzy by ordinary citizens in every block, in every neighborhood, and
in every community across this country. Meanwhile, unfazed, those who
battled for Prohibition moved forward, well aware of the cultural
significance that the German community gave to beer drinking. The
conclusion of the war had not brought a peace at home. It was just one
more thing that Joseph realized was so different about America. It
appeared that Americans were making one more attack on German
traditions. Those Sunday afternoons at the local beer gardens had become
the high point of many German-American families' week.[^219] Perhaps these
traditions were not as popular in Texas, but the German attitude toward
beer was certainly more liberal in cities such as New Braunfels,
Fredericksburg, and even San Antonio than it was in Hico or Hamilton.
Those areas with a heavy German population continued to vote against
Prohibition. Joseph was, of course, in Fredericksburg when Prohibition
began to become a major serious effort again. Added now was also a push
for "blue laws,"[^220] or laws that enforced Christian beliefs in keeping
Sunday as a day of rest. Sunday or Sabbath closing laws were seen as
essentially direct attacks on the rights of the German-American
community.[^221] Joseph had grown up Catholic. Sundays in Volkertshausen
required the Wiesers to participate in Mass; after all, the church was
right next door. It was difficult for them not to be seen attending
Mass. In Texas, all that had changed. Vincent's sons required him to
work on Sundays, and that lent a new meaning to him for the Lord's Day
of rest. Those experiences, along with the ostracization Joseph felt he
had received by members of the Catholic Church in Fredericksburg, caused
him to forever view Sunday as just another day of work.

The reorientation of German-Texans was now placed in a broader context
of the dramatic changes to occur in the 1920s in Anglo-America. First,
the revolution in morals, manners, customs, standards, and values
repudiated and destroyed the ideological unity with the prewar period.
One popular song, *"How 'Ya Gonna keep em down on the Farm after they've
seen Paree?"* [^222] basically said it all. America never returned to what
it was before the war. Second, and especially in Texas, Germans after
the war were increasingly accepted as "Anglos" to differentiate them
from African and Mexican-Americans. It was almost as if all was
forgiven, for now Anglo-Texans discovered there was a new enemy on the
block as thousands of refugees from Mexico had settled in Texas. San
Antonio, for example, had now become predominately Hispanic,
overwhelming the Germans who had settled there and thrived.
Consequently, during the 1920s, the anti-German nativism amazingly faded
as the previously existing anti-Mexican-American sentiment returned and
multiplied. Likewise, the attacks on the German language were replaced
by attacks on Spanish.[^223] And, many German-Texans, themselves victims
during the war, felt no hesitancy or embarrassment in demanding that
"Mexicans" learn English if they intended to live in the United States.
That sentiment also infiltrated Fredericksburg-Germans. But, programs of
coercive reform by the government were offensive to large numbers of
German Catholics and Lutherans. In their view, the central role of
government was to guarantee the fullest measure of personal liberty
consistent with law and order. Wilson's progressive successors had
sought a greater government role in people's lives. Joseph wisely chose
to participate in none of them one way or another. He had learned to
keep quiet while others resisted the government's intrusion to legislate
morality by means of prohibition or blue laws. Many believed this
invaded the authority of the church. Many Germans were appalled at the
effect blue laws could have on their traditions, amiable conversations,
convivial drinking, and innocent dancing in beer gardens or, for that
matter, at church picnics.[^224] Of course, in Fredericksburg such laws had
a lesser consequence because the town was still quite small, and German
family traditions were so strong that families simply stayed at home on
Sundays.

The change Joseph experienced in America was far different from what he
had expected. Even Vincent could not have forecasted what America became
during the war. Nothing, Vincent may have predicted had occurred in
either case. Joseph was left to find his own solutions to his dilemma.
It was as if the entire world Joseph had known up to this point had
crashed around him. His family had disintegrated when his father
destroyed his family. He had left Germany just before it was engulfed in
war. The government under which he had grown to maturity lay in ruins.
His mentor who brought him to America was dead. He had lived among
cousins who despised him. All that he had valued and known was under
attack by people crazed with patriotism. And now additional attacks on
traditions were being waged by zealots bent on restricting individual
choices. He had no choice but to turn inwardly while everything around
him was being destroyed. He had no choice but to rely on his personal
values and commit himself to his work, the work and steeled
determination that he believed would lead to a better life.

The war years were as a whole not good years for anyone of German
descent. Having moved to Fredericksburg just in the nick of time saved
Joseph from possible harassment in the Hamilton area. It had been a wise
move. He had found a good boarding house in which to reside, one with
good meals as well. As many Fredericksburg Germans did, he went on with
his life as if the ban against aliens did not exist. He opened his
office in the Gold Building on Main. He advertised for clients and made
his presence known even as federal law was making it illegal for German aliens to
work in the United States. His arrest and imprisonment in San Antonio
taught him a valuable lesson that he dared not repeat. He resolved to
keep a very low profile until this war was over. He withdrew some of his
advertising in *The Fredericksburg Standard.* He practiced little law
until the war was over, for it was illegal for him to do so as long as
he had not received his citizenship. He certainly voiced no opinions
about the war, nor did he comment or criticize the government under any
circumstances, for he knew that he could essentially trust no one. Those
that had sought his removal from their midst kept him under
surveillance. His release from jail had not suited them and having him
back in on the streets as a free man was a slap to their ego, and they
felt was an insult to the United States. Joseph had no choice but to
strive to become a model citizen, but how was he to survive with no
income?

Lena's boarding house and her family had become his family. Lena was not
worried about her reputation. The town's people had already taken care
of that. What did it matter that some thought she was harboring a German
spy? So, he had a place to stay. If he ran out of money and could not
pay, Lena had faith that one day he would. After all, she had given
meals to hundreds throughout the years who took advantage of her. So
many took advantage of her generosity that they became permanent guests
at her "kaffeeklatsches" mornings and afternoons, dinners and suppers
without giving thought to payment. After Joseph's acquittal, he had no
option but to set an example as a patriot and wait for this long
nightmare to end. Certainly, some sort of normalcy would return soon.
Certainly, those who thought him strange would change their minds as
they could see for themselves that he was loyal. Certainly, he would,
with time, acquire new clients and make a go of his practice. Certainly,
if all else failed, he could return to Hamilton to ask for work. This
was not something he intended to do, but it remained an option. As he
read and mediated, he resolved to make some personal changes. "Joseph"
seemed too religious, too formal, and simply too German. He resolved to
now call himself "J.B.!" Meanwhile, as he read, he noticed that the
headlines in Texas had shifted from the war to a new industry that was
taking Texas by storm. And it caused him to remember seeing those
gasoline tanks that stood just west of the depot and the astonishing
numbers of gas stations that had sprung up along San Saba Street. Oil! A
decade later Americans would be buying stocks as if they were going out
of style. At the end of World War I, it was oil that people wanted, and
the rush for oil was vicious and wild. And Texas was the front line.
J.B. wanted in, and he would play it with what little cash he had and
could borrow. A new decade, the 1920s lay ahead. Perhaps American would
be his opportunity after all.

<center>

![How Ya Gonna Keep Em Down on the Farm?](/assets/images/chapters/6/paree.jpg)

**"How 'Ya Gonna Keep 'Em Down on the Farm?"** [^225]

</center>


[^1]: Until 1870 there was no country known as Germany. There were hundreds
of small, individual states in which lived people speaking one or more
of hundreds of German dialects.

[^2]: German Americans by Dorothy Schneider - US History Encyclopedia
http://www.answers.com/topic/german-american - accessed September 20, 19xx.
Hereafter referenced as German Americans by Dorothy Schneider.

[^3]: The German Settlements in Central Texas -
http://www.texasalmanac.com/history/highlights/german/ - accessed September 21, 2008.

[^4]: German Americans by Dorothy Schneider.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: **Nativism** is an irrational prejudice against immigrants in favor of
the native-born members of a particular culture. It is often associated
with racism in that the targets of Nativism typically belong to a
different ethnic group than the perpetrators. http://civilliberty.about.com/od/immigrantsrights/g/Nativism-Definition.htm accessed August 24, 2010.

[^7]: The desertion rate in the U.S. army was 8.3% (9,200 out of 111,000),
compared to usual peacetime rates of about 14.8% per year, Many men
deserted in order to join another U.S. unit and get a second enlistment
bonus. Others deserted because of the miserable conditions in camp and
harsh punishments inflicted upon servicemen. -- Desertion -
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desertion - accessed October 31, 2010.

[^8]: The Texas State Convention of Germans adopted a political, social, and
religious platform in 1854 naming "Slavery as an evil, the abolition of
which is a requirement of democratic principles." Other points called
for direct election of the President of the United States, abolition of
capital punishment, free schools, including universities, and total
separation of church and state. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mason_County,\_Texas\#cite_note-7 accessed October 31, 2010.

[^9]: James Marten, Texas Divided: Dissent and Disloyalty in the Lone Star
State, 1856-1874 (Lexington, Ky., 1990), 121; Walter L. Buenger,
Secession and the Union in Texas (Austin, 1984), 80-83; Jurgen
Eichhoff, "The German Language in America" in America and the
Germans, 1:232; N. W. Ayer and Son's Newspaper Annual and Directory
(Philadelphia, 1914), 1257-1258. Fighting everything German in Texas,
1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 assessed September 21, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Marten Texas Divided.

[^10]: Marten -- Texas Divided.

[^11]: John Higham, Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism,
1860-1920 (New Brunswick, N.J., 1955), 214; Richard Egon Tausch,
\"Southern Sentiment among the Texas Germans during the Civil War and
Reconstruction,\" (M.A. thesis, University of Texas, 1965), 23-25;
Buenger, Secession and the Union in Texas, 62; Texas, House, H.B. no.
107, [House Journal, 35th Leg., 4th C.S.]{.ul}, 1918. - Fighting
Everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 --
assessed September 21, 2008

[^12]: **Adelsverein** - The Adelsverein story began early in the 1840s, when
a group of high-born and socially conscious German noblemen conceived
the notion of establishing a colony of German farmers and craftsmen in
Texas. Under-funded, over-extended, scammed by scallywags, and beset
with bad advice, the association still dispatched more than thirty-six
chartered ships carrying over 7,000 immigrants to the ports of Galveston
and Indianola in the short space of five years. The gently-rolling
limestone and oakforested hill country of south-central Texas was
transformed utterly into a district of neat and prosperous farms and
well-laidout towns. These settlers valued culture and comfort, order,
and hard work. Schools, churches, singing-societies and businesses were
established almost at once. The German Hill Country was a world almost
apart, becoming even more so with the Civil War, when its residents held
out against secession and for the Union. -- Celia Hayes, Adelsverein:
The Gathering http://www.celiahayes.com/AdelsvereinPre-Order.htm - accessed October 31, 2010.

[^13]: German Americans by Dorothy Schneider.

[^14]: **Freidenker** -- Freethinkers are people with no religious
commitment. They are independent from religious rules but believe in
ethical principles of freedom, equality, tolerance, and nonviolence.
Free Thinker - http://www.calsky.com/lexikon/de/txt/f/fr/freidenker accessed November 22, 2010.

[^15]:**Sisterdale, Texas** -- One of the Latin Settlements, resulting from
the Revolutions of 1848 in the German states. Those who settled there
were intellectual liberal abolitionists who enjoyed conversing in Latin
and believed in utopian ideals that guaranteed basic human rights to
all. They reveled in passionate conversations about literature, music,
and philosophy. The Free Thinkers were the forerunners of the 1950s Beat
Generation and the Flower Children of the 1960s. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sisterdale,\_Texas
accessed November 22, 2010.

[^16]: The elder **Baron von Westphalen** had been Karl Marx's professor at
the University of Bonn where Karl met his daughter. Her brother later
inherited the title and came to Texas. http://www.cyberessays.com/lists/what-did-baron-von-steuben-do-in-therevolutionary-war/page120.html accessed November 23, 2010.

[^17]: Among the settlers were German geographer Ernst Kapp, Baron Ottmar
von Behr, journalist Dr. Carl Adolph Douai, August Siemering, who
founded the *San Antonio Express and News*, author, journalist and
diplomat Dr. Julius Fr√∂bel, future Wall Street financial wiz Gustav
Theissen, Baron Edgar von Westphalen, brother-in-law of Karl Marx, and
Edward Degener, future GOP U.S. Representative from Texas. Also among
the settlers was Julius Dresel, a former member of the German Chambers
of Deputies, who established a winery in Sisterdale and eventually moved
to California's Sonoma Valley to found the Rhein Farm Vineyards. -
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sisterdale,\_Texas -- accessed November 22,
 2010.

[^18]: German Americans by Dorothy Schneider.

[^19]: Indianola, Texas -- A stretch of beach near the point selected by
Carl, Prince of Solms Braunfels, commissioner general of the
Adelsverein, as the landing place for German immigrants bound for
western Texas under the sponsorship of the society. The town grew
rapidly and came to rank as the second port of Texas, a position it held
until the catastrophic hurricane of 1875 devastated the low-lying city.
It rebuilt but was obliterated by another hurricane in 1886, and the
site was abandoned. - Brownson Malsch, \"INDIANOLA, TX,\" Handbook of
Texas Online - http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hvi11 accessed November 24, 2010.

[^20]: Brands, H. W., *Lone Star Nation: The Epic Story of the Battle for
Texas Independence.* P67*.* Austin, Stephen Fuller "Journal of Stephen
F. Austin on his First Trip to Texas, 1821," *The Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association,* vol. 7 (1904), 286-307.

[^21]: Robert A. Caro, The Path to Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1982.

[^22]: **Neu Braunfels** or New Braunfels was founded in 1845 on the Comal River.

[^23]: **The Edwards Plateau** -- A region that is entirely contained
within Texas. Clearly demarcated by the Balcones Fault escarpment to
the east and south, it grades into the Chihuahuan Desert to the
west and the Great Plains to the north. The plateau can be divided
into four sub regions. The central and western portions of the
plateau are characterized by broad, relatively level uplands
moderately dissected by gently sloping stream divides. The deeply dissected
portion adjacent to the escarpment, the Balcones Canyon lands, is
popularly known as the Texas Hill Country. This region is highly
dissected by fast-moving streams through steep-sided canyons. The
northeast plateau, the Lampasas Cut Plains, is characterized by
broad valleys. The final sub region is the Central Mineral Valley
or Llano Uplift. This area has a granitic substrate that clearly
differentiates this area from surrounding areas. The Edwards
Plateau was originally a grassy savannah with the most common trees being
mesquite, juniper, and live oaks. Some of this community type
still remains, but agricultural practices have heavily modified most of
the area. The eastern and wetter end of the Plateau is
characterized by diverse woodlands including hardwoods (primarily oaks) and Ashe
Juniper. Periodic, naturally-occurring fire was a major
ecological force in the western plateau that maintained live oak
savannahs and produced a mosaic of habitats across broad landscapes.
Edwards Plateau: Executive Summary - http://www.blm.gov/wildlife/pl_53sum.htm - accessed October 31, 2010.

[^24]: **The Pinta Trail** -- This was also once known by the Spanish
as the Camino Pinta and was an ancient Indian trail. The Spanish
used it to service Santa Cruz de San Saba Mission near Menard,
Texas. There is little surviving physical evidence of the trail;
however, the orientation of Main Street in Fredericksburg and the
house arrangement in Cain City area provide some clues to the location. Natural geographic features such as river bends and Cain City Mountain Pass in Gillespie County serve as directional indicators. -- The San Antonio, Fredericksburg and Northern Railway, completed in 1913, paralleled the Pinta Trail in southern Gillespie County and northern Kendall County. U.S. 87 proceeds along the trail through Cherry Spring and Mason, State Highway 29 follows the Pinta Trail from Mason to Menard.Nina L. Nixon, The Pinta Trail http://www.sanantonio.gov/planning/neighborhoods/north%20central/Appendix%20J.PDF
accessed October 31, 2010.

[^25]: **Fisher-Miller Land Grant** -- the grant was made by the
Republic of Texas in 1842 for the purpose of settling 1,000
immigrant families of German, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, and Norwegian ancestry
in Texas under the auspices of the San Saba Colonization Company. Rudolph L. Biesele, \"FISHER-MILLER LAND GRANT\",
*Handbook of Texas Online*, (http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/mnf01),
accessed October 27, 2010

[^26]: Robert A. Caro, The Path to Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1982.

[^27]: Tippens, Matthew D. Turning Germans into Texans: World War I
and the Assimilation and Survival of German Culture in Texas, 1900-1930. Hereafter referenced as Tippens - Turning Germans into
Texans.

[^28]: United Stats Nationality Laws http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_nationality_law\#Naturalization accessed October 31, 2010.

[^29]: National German-American Alliance http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_German-American_Alliance accessed September 20, 2008.

[^30]: **Sedition Act of 1918** -- This act was passed by the United
State Congress and signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on
May 16, 1918 and forbade the use of "disloyal, profane, scurrilous,
or abusive language" about the United States government, its flag,
its armed forces, or anything else that caused others to view the
American government or its institutions with contempt. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sedition_Act_of_1918 accessed
October 23, 2010.

[^31]: William J. Breen, Uncle Sam at Home: Civilian Mobilization,
Wartime Federalism, and the Council of National Defense, 1917-1919
(Westport, Conn., 1984), 4-11, 97-104; David Kennedy, Over Here:
The First World War and American Society (New York, 1980),Army Appropriation Act (29 August 1916), Statutes at Large
39, pt. 2, 649-650; Texas, House, H.B. no. 87, House Journal, 35th
Leg., 1st C.S., 1917; J. F. Carl to W. G. Gifford, 22 May 1917,
TWRC; Sam H. Acheson et al., Texian Who\'s Who: A Biographical
Dictionary of the State of Texas (Dallas, 1937), 78. - Fighting
everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94
-- assessed September 21, 2008. Here after referenced as - Breen,
Uncle Sam at Home: Civilian Mobilization.

[^32]: Texas State Data Center -
http://txsdc.utsa.edu/txdata/apport/hist_b.php - accessed
September 22, 2008.

[^33]: United States, Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census,
Thirteenth Census of the United States, 1:30, 813, 834-838, 918-924;
United States, Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census,
Fourteenth Census of the United States, 1: 692, 895, 903. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag
22-JUN-94 assessed September 21, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Thirteenth Census of the United States.

[^34]: In 1850 two of the top ten cities in Texas were German. New
Braunfels was the 4th largest city and Fredericksburg was the 8th largest.
Population Ranks by Mike Cox. http://www.texasescapes.com/MikeCoxTexasTales/Population-Ranks.htm
 accessed November 21, 2010.

[^35]: **Weinstube** -- A wine pub in Germany.

[^36]: Tippens - Turning Germans into Texans.

[^37]: Wooster, Ralph A., Life on the Texas Home Front, p. 85

[^38]: The Movement Comes of Age -
http://www.tsl.state.tx.us/exhibits/suffrage/comesofage/page1.html -
accessed October 31, 2010.

[^39]: Luebke, "German Immigrants and American Politics," 85-86.

[^40]: R. P. Shuler to Martin McNulty Crane, 26 January 1918, and
Martin M. Crane to William P. Hobby, 6 March 1918, in Martin
McNulty Crane Papers, University of Texas Archives; Janet G.
Humphrey, ed., A Texas Suffragist: Diaries and Writings of Jane J.
image7.png McCallum (Austin, 1988), 102-103
Texas Women\'s Democratic League, \"S.O.S. Call to Texas Women,\"
Texas War Records Collection (hereafter TWRC), University of Texas Archives, n.d.;
Hobby Campaign Committee, "German-American Alliance Made Plans to Control Texas; Was \'Interested\' in Jas. E. Ferguson,\"
W. P. Hobby Collection, Barker History Center, University of Texas Archives, n.d.; Lewis L. Gould, Progressives and Prohibitionists: Texas Democrats in the Wilson Era (Austin, 1973), 54, 239-243, 255. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 -- assessed September 21, 2008



[^41]: Carl Wittke, [German Americans and the World War]{.ul} (With Special
Emphasis on Ohio\'s German Language Press) (Columbus, Ohio, 1936),
3-129; Mark Sonntag, \"Hyphenated Texans: World War I and the German
Americans of Texas,\" (M.A. thesis, University of Texas, 1990), 19-37;
Clifton J. Child, The German Americans in Politics, 1914-1917 (Madison,
Wis., 1939), 37-39; Austin *Wochenblatt*, 16 September 1914; Brenham
Texas Volksbote, 2 October 1914; *Friedrichsburg Wochenblatt*, 27 August
1914; Sue Bruns, \"Persecution of German Americans in Central Texas
during World War I,\" (M.A. thesis, Southwest Texas State University,
1972), 64; Ferguson Forum, 27 December 1917. - [Fighting everything
German in Texas]{.ul}, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 -- assessed
September 21, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Wittke -- German Americans.

[^42]: Carl Wittke, German Americans and the World War

[^43]: A new era for Cincinnati Catholics: World War I by David J.
Merkowitz http://catholiccincinnati.org/tct/CT%20Anniversary/week4.html - accessed
September 19, 2008. Hereafter referenced as A new era for Cincinnati
Catholics.

[^44]: US History Encyclopedia: German Americans.

[^45]: German-Americans in Times of Stress:

[^46]: US History Encyclopedia: German Americans by Dorothy Schneider

[^47]: Ibid.

[^48]: **FrankValentineVan Der Stucken** (1858--1929). Frank Van der Stucken,
composer and conductor, was born in Fredericksburg, Texas, in 1858.. Van
der Stucken returned in 1884 to America as director of the New York
Arion Society, a male chorus founded in 1854, during his first years in
New York. In April 1885 in New York City, he conducted the first concert
in this country devoted exclusively to works by American composers. In
1889 he conducted the first European concert with an entirely American
program at the World Exposition in Paris. In 1895 he moved to Cincinnati
to become the first conductor of the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, a
post he held until 1907. He was also director and dean of the Cincinnati
College of Music from 1897 to 1903 and musical director of one of the
oldest music festivals in the United States, the Cincinnati May
Festival, from 1906 to 1912 and 1923 to 1927. As a composer, Van der
Stucken followed the precepts of the Liszt--Wagner school of
programmatic music. He wrote colorful orchestral and choral works as
well as many songs and a few miscellaneous instrumental works. His major
works include an unproduced opera, *Vlasda*; *Symphonic Prologue to
Heine\'s William Ratcliffe*; incidental music for Shakespeare\'s *The
Tempest*; *Festzug*; *Pax Triumphans*; and *Louisiana*, a march
commissioned for the St. Louis Exposition in 1904. He was named Officier
de l\'Instruction Publique by the French government and Chevalier de
l\'Ordre Leopold and Officier de la Couronne by King Albert of Belgium.
An international music festival named for the composer was inaugurated
in Fredericksburg in 1991 by Kenn Knopp. - *Handbook of Texas Online*,
s.v. , http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/VV/fva4.html
(accessed October 21, 2010). Hereafter referenced as Van Der Stucken.

[^49]: Thirteenth Census of the United States.

[^50]: German Texan - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_Texan - accessed
September 19, 2010.

[^51]: James Marten, Texas Divided.

[^52]: Fredericksburg Wochenblatt, 20 May 1915; Katholische Rundschau, 4
August 1914, 4 November 1914, 24 February 1915, 4 June 1918; Lutherbote
fur Texas, December 1916. - Fighting everything German in Texas,
1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 -- assessed September 21, 2008.

[^53]: LaVern J. Rippley, \"Ameliorated Americanization: The Effect of World
War I on German Americans in the 1920s,\" in America and the Germans,
2:222; Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty, 3-26, 281-289. - Fighting everything
German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 -- assessed
September 21, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Rippley -- Ameliorated
Americanization.

[^54]: **The Zimmermann Note** -- A secret telegram sent on Jan. 16, 1917, by
German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmermann to Count Johann von
Bernstorff, the German ambassador to the United States. In it Zimmermann
said that in the event of war with the United States, Mexico should be
asked to enter the war as a German ally. In return, Germany promised to
restore to Mexico the lost territories of Texas, New Mexico, and
Arizona. British intelligence intercepted and deciphered the telegram
and sent it to President Woodrow Wilson, who released it on Mar. 1, 1917
to the press. The Zimmermann note helped turn U.S. public opinion
against Germany during World War I and strengthened the advocates of
U.S. entry into the war. http://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/Zimmermann+note accessed July 27, 2011.

[^55]: A new era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^56]: "Get the Rope!" Anti-German Violence in World War I-era Wisconsin\
http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/1/ - accessed September 21, 2008. Hereafter references as "Get the Rope!"\

[^57]: German-Americans in World War I by Nate Williams, - Wittenberg
University, http://www.wfa-usa.org/new/germanamer.htm - accessed
September 19, 2010. Here after referenced as Williams - German-Americans.

[^58]: A new era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^59]: American Protective League - This volunteer group, known as the
American Protective League (APL), headquartered in Washington with
branches throughout the country became a quasi-official investigating
arm of the Justice Department, with the official task of investigating
war-related internal security cases. The APL led the Wilson
administration deeply into controversy over the question of how much
authority the United States government could or should give to
volunteers in investigating suspected spies and saboteurs. What began as
an agreement to allow patriotic citizens to help the Justice Department
defend the country and coincidently maintain its dominance in internal
security eventually led the government deeply into citizen quarrels,
such as personal grudges, labor disputes, and serious differences over
economic and political policy. -- "Civil Liberties: What's Wrong with
the TIPS Program?" A WWI Horrow Story Ripped from the History Books --
History News Network - http://hnn.us/articles/960.html - accessed
October 31, 2010. Hereafter referenced as American Protective League.

[^60]: Committee on Public Information from Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Committee_on_Public_Information - accessed
September 20, 2008. Hereafter references as Committee on Public Information.

[^61]: US History Encyclopedia: German Americans by Dorothy Schneider -
http://www.answers.com/topic/german-american - accessed September 20, 2008.

[^62]: Committee on Public Information.

[^63]: A new era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^64]: Committee on Public Information

[^65]: Ibid.

[^66]: American Protective League.

[^67]: American Defense Society - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Defense_Society - accessed September 20, 2008.

[^68]: Bulletin No. 13, Texas State Council of Defense
to Various County Councils, 28 December 1917, TWRC; Austin Wochenblatt,
28 August 1918; *Fredericksburg Wochenblatt*, 14 February 1918; Ferguson
Forum, 19 December 1918; Bruns, \"Persecution of German Americans,\"
123; *Neu-Braunfelser Zeitung*, 19 December 1918. - Fighting everything
German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 -- assessed
September 21, 2008. Hereinafter referenced as Bulletin No. 13.

[^69]: **Intelligent Patriotism** -- The patriotic feeling, instinctive
patriotism, under the control and guidance of knowledge and reflection.
It is love of country and the disposition to serve it, coupled with a
knowledge of how to serve it well. -- Patriotism, Instinctive and
Intelligent -- Internet Archive - http://www.archive.org/stream/patriotisminstin00howerich/patriotisminstin00howerich_djvu.txt accessed November 24, 2010.

[^70]: Ralph W. Steen, "World War I," *Handbook of Texas Online,* -
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/qdw01 accessed November 23, 2010.

[^71]: Bulletin No. 13.

[^72]: Nelson, German-American Political Behavior, 28; Luebke, Bonds of
Loyalty, 271-280; Rippley, German Americans, 187-192; Kennedy, Over
Here, 88. - Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark
Sonntag

[^73]: Executive Order 9066: The President Authorizes Japanese Relocation -
In an atmosphere of World War II hysteria, President Roosevelt
authorized the internment of tens of thousands of American citizens of
Japanese ancestry and resident aliens from Japan. Dated February 19, 1942, it gave the military broad powers to ban any
citizen from a fifty- to sixty-mile-wide coastal area stretching from
Washington state to California and extending inland into southern
Arizona. The order also authorized transporting these citizens to
assembly centers hastily set up and governed by the military in
California, Arizona, Washington state, and Oregon. Although it is not well-known, the same executive order (and other war-time orders and restrictions) were also applied to smaller numbers
of residents of the United States who were of Italian or German descent.
For example, 3,200 resident aliens of Italian background were arrested,
and more than 300 of them were interned. About 11,000 German residents,
including some naturalized citizens, were arrested and more than 5000
were interned. Yet while these individuals (and others from those
groups) suffered grievous violations of their civil liberties, the
wartime measures applied to Japanese Americans were worse and more
sweeping, uprooting entire communities and targeting citizens as well as
resident aliens."History Matters: The U.S. Survey Course on the Web" http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5154 accessed November 1, 2010.

[^74]: Committee on Public Information.

[^75]: Ibid.

[^76]: Ibid.

[^77]:*The Prussian Cur* produced in 1918 is now considered a lost film. (A
cur is a base or cowardly person.) It was notable for perpetuating the
story of the *Crucified Soldier.* The film's director Raoul Walsh called
it his "rottenest picture ever" for its anti-German sentiment. -
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Prussian_Cur - assessed August 2, 2011. ![Crucified Solier](/assets/images/chapters/6/crus.jpg)

[^78]: Committee on Public Information from Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Committee_on_Public_Information - accessed September 20, 2008.

[^79]: It is interesting that almost all films produced in the United States continue to be centered or concentrated on the evils fostered by the Nazis while practically none are based on the oppression and atrocities committed by those nations ruled by the communists.

[^80]: Committee on Public Information.

[^81]: German-Americans in Times of Stress.

[^82]: Committee on Public Information

[^83]: The Treaty of Versailles. - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty_of_Versailles - accessed September 21, 2008.

[^84]: Frederick C. Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty: German Americans and World War I (DeKalb, 1974), 27-33; Christine M. Totten, "Elusive Affinities: Acceptance and Rejection of the German Americans," in America and the Germans: An Assessment of a Three Hundred Year History, ed. Frank Trommler and Joseph McVeigh (Philadelphia, 1985), 2:187. Here after referenced as Luebke ‚Äì Bonds of Loyalty.

[^85]: Luebke ‚Äì Bonds of Loyalty.

[^86]: To Hell with the Kaiser - http://www.rainfall.com/posters/Movie/1856.htm - accessed September 20, 2008.

[^87]: A new era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^88]: Ibid.

[^89]: German Americans by Dorothy Schneider

[^90]: Ibid.

[^91]: German-Americans in Times of Stress: World War I & World War II ‚Äì Lesson 5 - http://wwwlib.iupui.edu/kade/merrill/lesson5.html - accessed September 19, 2008. 92 Woodrow Wilson (1913-1921) ‚Äì Internet Public Library: POTUS ‚Äì ‚ÄúRate it all!‚Äù - http://www.rateitall.com/i-12275-woodrowwilson-1913-1921.aspx accessed November 24, 2010.


[^92]: Woodrow Wilson (1913-1921) ‚Äì Internet Public Library: POTUS ‚Äì ‚ÄúRate it all!‚Äù - http://www.rateitall.com/i-12275-woodrowwilson-1913-1921.aspx accessed November 24, 2010

[^93]: LaVern J. Rippley, The German Americans (Latham, Md., 1984), 185-187; Clifford L. Nelson, German-American Political Behavior in Nebraska and Wisconsin, 1916-1920 (Lincoln, 1972), 27-33; Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty, 268. - Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Rippley ‚Äì
German Americans.

[^94]: Rippley ‚Äì German Americans.

[^95]: ‚ÄúEspionage History.‚Äù

[^96]: ‚ÄúGet the Rope!‚Äù Anti-German Violence in World War I-era Wisconsin - http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/1/ - accessed September 21, 2008

[^97]: Rippley ‚Äì German Americans.

[^98]: Robert Prager - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Prager - accessed September 21, 2008.

[^99]: The Knights of Liberty, an organization founded in St. Louis, Missouri in August 1846, but in reality a front fro the KKK. During World War I they focused on foreigners, especially Germans and participated in mob retaliations. ‚Äì Knights of Liberty http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knights_of_Liberty accessed November 23, 2010.


[^100]: The New York Times, May 3, 1918, Tarred and Feathered by Knights of Liberty -
http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F70A1EF6345B11738DDDAA0894DD405B888DF1D3 ‚Äì accessed September 19, 2010., P. L. Campbell to Carl, 11 January 1919, Rebel L. Robertson to Carl, 24 July 1918, Fred Huggins to Carl, 10 January 1918, and J. F. Christiansen to A. H. Fleming, 16 August 1918, all in TWRC. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94, The New York times, May 3, 1918, assessed September 21, 2008.

[^101]: The United States Goes to War - 1917 - http://www.fsmitha.com/h2/ch07-US.htm - accessed September 21, 2008

[^102]: A new era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^103]: German-Americans in Times of Stress: World War I & World War II ‚Äì Lesson 5 - http://wwwlib.iupui.edu/kade/merrill/lesson5.html - accessed September 19, 2008.

[^104]: Liberty Bond Drives - In 1917 and 1918, the United States government issued liberty bonds to raise money for its involvement in World War I. An aggressive campaign was created to popularize the bonds, grounded largely as patriotic appeals. The government used famous artists to make posters, and used movie stars to host bond rallies. The bond campaigns themselves proved relatively ineffective at gaining widespread public support. The majority of Americans were simply uncomfortable converting a significant portion of their savings into, what was for them, a new and uncertain form of investments. The forceful sales atmosphere associated with the Liberty Bond campaigns ultimately produced disappointing sales figures. As such, the bond campaigns are remembered more for their associated level of coercion and bullying than their patriotic and voluntary nature. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_bond - accessed October 31, 2010.

[^105]: Records of the District Court of Lee County, Texas, Cases no. 1865 and no. 1871, Local Records Division, Texas State Archives; Giddings Deutsches Volksblatt, 24 October 1918. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 assessed September 21, 2008.

[^106]: Bruns, "Persecution of German Americans," 53-54; C. Douglas Duncan to Carl, 7 November 1918, TWRC; Ferguson Forum, 21, 28 November, and 18 April 1918. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008.

[^107]: Espionage History (1917-1918) - http://www.essortment.com/all/espionagehistor_rago.htm
accessed September 21, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Espionage History.

[^108]: ‚ÄúA new era for Cincinnati Catholics.‚Äù

[^109]: ‚ÄúUS History Encyclopedia: German Americans.‚Äù

[^110]: A new era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^111]: Ibid. Signing loyalty oaths were still mandatory as recently as 1965 when the author was required to signing an oath that he was never a member of the Communist Party as a prerequisite for accepting a teaching position in Seguin, Texas.

[^112]: US History Encyclopedia: ‚ÄúGerman Americans.‚Äù

[^113]: ‚ÄúA new era for Cincinnati Catholics.‚Äù

[^114]: US History Encyclopedia: ‚ÄúGerman Americans‚Äù by Dorothy Schneider - http://www.answers.com/topic/german-american - accessed September 20, 2008.

[^115]: ‚ÄúGerman-Americans in Times of Stress: World War I & World War II - L e s o n 5‚Äù - http://wwwlib.iupui.edu/kade/merrill/lesson5.html - accessed September 19, 2008.

[^116]: A New Era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^117]: Ibid.

[^118]: German-Americans in Times of Stress: World War I & World War II - L e s o n 5 - http://wwwlib.iupui.edu/kade/merrill/lesson5.html - accessed September 19, 2008.

[^119]: Beat Back the Hun with Liberty ‚Äì American propaganda poster for investment by F. Strothmann c. 1918 -
http://www.gettyimages.com/detail/89860121/Hulton-Archive - accessed September 19, 2010.

[^120]: Trading with the Enemy Act (6 October 1917), Statutes at Large 40, pt. 1:425-426; Austin Wochenblatt, 17 October 1917. - Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008.

[^121]: Katholische Rundschau, 25 April 1917, 2 January, 13 February 1918; Carl to Walter Reiffert, 22 November 1917, TWRC. - Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008. Hereafter references as ‚Äì Katholische Rundschau, 25 April 1917.

[^122]: Ibid.

[^123]: Katholische Rundschau, 5 April 1916; Brenham Texas Volksbote, 12 April 1918; Fredericksburg Wochenblatt, 11 October 1917; NeuBraunfelser Zeitung, 16 August 1917; Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty, 271. - Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008.

[^124]: Neu-Braunfelser Zeitung, 6 August 1914, 14 June, 11 October 1917; Fredericksburg Wochenblatt, 3 September 1914, 11 October 1917; Lutherbote fur Texas, July 1918. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag, 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008.

[^125]: Friedrichsburg Wochenblatt, 5 July 1917; E. E. Fischer to Carl, 13 August 1918, TWRC; Ayer and Son's Annual (1914), 1257-1258; N. W. Ayer and Son's Newspaper Annual and Directory (Philadelphia, 1920), 1292; Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty, 271. - Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 assessed September 21, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Wochenblatt, 5 July 1917.

[^126]: Wochenblatt, 5 July 1917

[^127]: Wochenblatt, 5 July 1917.

[^128]: Ibid.

[^129]: James Robert Mock, Censorship 1917 (Princeton, 1941), 32; Henry Schmidt, "The Rhetoric of Survival: The Germanist in America from 1900 to 1925," in America and the Germans, 2:211; Resolution of the State Council of Defense, 11 February 1919, TWRC; Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty, 312; Giddings News, 23 August 1918; Texas, House, H.B. no. 128, House Journal, 35th Leg., 4th C.S., 1918. - Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008.

[^130]: Minutes of the Fayette County Council of Defense, 4 July 1918, TWRC; Bruns, "Persecution of German Americans," Giddings News, 23 August 1918; James W. Gerard, Face to Face with Kaiserism (New York, 1918), 285-287; Lewis L. Gould, "The University Becomes Politicized," Southwestern Historical Quarterly 86 (1982): 255-276; William Nicholas, "World War I and Academic Dissent in Texas," Arizona and the West 14 (1972): 215-230. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008. Hereafter referenced as ‚ÄúMinutes of Fayette County Council.‚Äù

[^131]: ‚ÄúMinutes of Fayette County Council.‚Äù

[^132]: Bulletin no. 17, Circular no. 36, ‚ÄúCouncil of National Defense to the Several State Councils,‚Äù 21 December 1918, TWRC; R. E. L. Adams to Robert Vinson, 25 March 1918, J. Clay Walker to Vinson, 21 June 1919, and J. H. Rogers to Vinson, 8 November 1917, all in University of Texas Archives, University President's Office, Correspondence.

[^133]: The New York Times, May 3, 1918, Tarred and Feathered by Knights of Liberty -
http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F70A1EF6345B11738DDDAA0894DD405B888DF1D3 ‚Äì accessed September 19, 2010., P. L. Campbell to Carl, 11 January 1919, Rebel L. Robertson to Carl, 24 July 1918, Fred Huggins to Carl, 10 January 1918, and J. F. Christiansen to A. H. Fleming, 16 August 1918, all in TWRC. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94, The New York times, May 3, 1918, ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008

[^134]: H. R. Hopps 1917 - ‚ÄòDestroy this mad brute‚Äô is the caption of this World War I propaganda poster for enlistment in the US Army. It showed a dribbling, ape-like German wielding a club bearing the word "kultur" and wearing a pickelhaube helmet with the word "militarism" - http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:%27Destroy_this_mad_brute%27_WWI_propaganda_poster_(USversion).jpg#globalusage ‚Äì accessed September 19, 2010.

[^135]: Rodney P. Carlisle, World War I, p. 225. - http://books.google.com/books? ‚Äì accessed October 31, 2010.

[^136]: Houston Riot (1917) - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Houston_Riot_(1917) ‚Äì accessed October 31, 2010.

[^137]: Wooster, Ralph A., Life on the Texas Home Front, p. 97, Peterson, H.C. and Gilbert C. Fite, ‚ÄúOpponents of War, 1917-1918,‚Äù Madison, WS: 1957. p. 90.

[^138]: Williams - German-Americans.

[^139]: Ibid.

[^140]: Fredericksburg Wochenblatt, 5 July 1917; E. E. Fischer to Carl, 13 August 1918, TWRC; Ayer and Son's Annual (1914), 1257-1258; N. W. Ayer and Son's Newspaper Annual and Directory (Philadelphia, 1920), 1292; Luebke, Bonds of Loyalty, 271. - Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008 ‚Äì Hereafter referenced as ‚Äì Wochenblatt ‚Äì 5 July 1917.

[^141]: A New Era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^142]: Ibid.

[^143]: Ibid.

[^144]: German-Americans in Times of Stress.

[^145]: US History Encyclopedia: ‚ÄúGerman Americans.‚Äù

[^146]: Breen, Uncle Sam at Home: Civilian Mobilization.

[^147]: Carl to J. F. Fischer, 15 August 1918, Walter Reiffert to Carl, 23 July 1918, and L. Beaty to Carl, 20 December 1917, all in TWRC. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008.

[^148]: Education News Bulletin, May 1918; R. G. Crosby to Carl, 23 December 1918, TWRC; Minutes of the Fayette County Council ofDefense, 4 July 1918, TWRC; ‚ÄúResolution of the Texas State Council of Defense, 11 February 1919,‚Äù TWRC; Council of National Defense, Texas Division Woman's Committee, "Report of Child Welfare Department, Woman's Committee Council of National Defense, Texas Division, April 6, 1918 to June 1, 1919," n.d., TWRC. Fighting everything German in Texas, 1917-1919 by Mark Sonntag 22-JUN-94 ‚Äì assessed September 21, 2008

[^149]: Joan M. Jensen, The Price of Vigilance (Chicago: Rand McNally and Company, 1968), 163 ‚Äì ‚ÄúGerman-Americans in World War I.‚Äù by Nate Williams, Wittenberg University - http://www.wfa-usa.org/new/germanamer.htm.

[^150]: Van Dyke ‚Äì A ‚ÄúVan Dyke‚Äù is a variation of a goatee with a mustache, named after the 17th century Flemish painter, Sir Anthony Van Dyck. - http://www.ravnwood.com/archives/001361.php - accessed May 29, 2009.

[^151]: ‚ÄúOne Hundred Years of Southeast Texas Weather (1900-2000): 1917 Heat Wave and Drought,‚Äù
http://www.srh.noaa.gov/hgx/?n=climate_holidays_hundred ‚Äì accessed August 24, 2010.

[^152]: The winter, 1917-1918, will prove to be the 10th coldest in recorded history for Texas through 2008. The El Nino effect was still unknown at that time, but Fredericksburg was about to receive a little over nine inches of snow. It would snow double that amount during the winter of 1918-1919. McCullough, Patrick A., ‚ÄúWest Central Texas during El Nino: A Look at Snowfall,‚Äù - http://www.srh.noaa.gov/sjt//images/hydrology/ENSOsnow.pdf - accessed June 7, 2009

[^153]: Ibid.

[^154]: Hamilton, Texas. The first settlers came to the area in 1855, about ten years after Fredericksburg was founded. Hamilton became the county seat in 1858 and was named, like the town, for South Carolina Governor James Hamilton. The Civil War and Indian attacks, which continued until 1876, slowed the growth of Hamilton. By 1896 Hamilton had a population of 1,100, a grocery, two saloons, and three general stores. In 1899 a flood destroyed many of the homes in Hamilton and drowned one resident. Railroad service did not begin until 1907-08, just six years prior to J.B.‚Äôs arrival in the area, when the Stephenville, North, and South Texas Railway was extended from Stephenville to Hamilton. The St. Louis Southwestern Railroad of Texas also served the community for many years. By 1910 the population was 1,548, and in 1911 Hamilton was incorporated as a city. At one time the town supported five cotton gins, obviously a flour mill owned by Vincent Wieser, and until prohibition, a row of saloons along the north side of the town square. ‚Äì Handbook of Texas Online, http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/HH/hgh2.html - accessed June 7, 2009.

[^155]: This photograph was taken in 1914 in the lakeside city of Lindau located on Lake Constance for securing a passport to travel to the United States. Numerous copies have survived. Many are in the possession of Mark Wieser.

[^156]: Vincent Wieser was actually the nephew to J.B.‚Äôs grandfather, making Vincent and J.B.‚Äôs father, Wendelin, first cousins and a second cousin to J.B. Because Vincent was 72 when he returned to Germany in 1910 at a time when J.B. was only 22, he was given the respect that his age demanded and referred to as ‚Äúuncle.‚Äù

[^157]: He was obviously intending to stay in Hamilton just a month prior to his arrival in Fredericksburg, Chicago

[^158]: Personal Efficiency; The How and Why Magazine published by the LaSalle Extension University, Chicago, Illinois, February 1917, http://books.google.com/books?id=-
APPAAAAMAAJ&pg=PT109&lpg=PT109&dq=J+B+Wieser&source=bl&ots=mG8i_FsuYj&sig=-
arZTC4L2plVBXhoqObax0VVY-c&hl=en&ei=3x2WTuWIYSXtwern6HzBg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=6&sqi=2&ved=0CDkQ6AEwBQ#v=onepage&q=J%20B%20Wieser&f=false ‚Äì accessed October 12, 2011.


[^159]: Ibid.

[^160]: Ibid.

[^161]: Samuel Miller Breckinridge Long (1917-1920) served as Third Assistant to the Secretary of State. The position had many diverse assignments: supervision of several geographic divisions; oversight of the Bureaus of Accounts and Appointments; international conferences and commissions; and ceremonials and protocol, including presentation to the President of chiefs of foreign diplomatic missions. ‚Äì Third Assistant Secretaries of State http://history.state.gov/departmenthistory/people/principalofficers/third-assistant-secretary - accessed September 25, 2011. A personal friend of the future Franklin Roosevelt, he garnered much criticism for his stance on immigration that indicated his opposition to relaxing immigration laws during World War II and suggested that United States consuls simply put every obstacle in the way of immigrants by requiring additional evidence from applicants and resorting to various administrative devices which would postpone the granting of visas. His suggestions effectively prevented 90% of the quotas available to immigrants from countries under German and Italian control never to be filled. He was eventually exposed for having obstructed rescue attempts, drastically restricted immigration, and falsified figures of refugees admitted. - Breckinridge Long - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breckinridge_Long - accessed September. This bias may have caused him to consider J.B.‚Äôs application with great indifference and without remorse deliberately intended to kill any chance for J.B. to be considered, and it may answer the question as to how any governmental agency could provide such an answer so quickly.

[^162]: Many of these jobbers and their storage tanks are still found along the abandoned railroad right-of-way today.

[^163]: San Saba Street was changed to Main Street when Fredericksburg was finally incorporated as a city in 1928. It was suggested renaming all streets in town in order to have the first letters of each of those streets spell out W-E-L-C-O-M-E in one direction and C-O-M-E B-A-C-K in the other direction.

[^164]: Nimitz Hotel ‚Äì The hotel was built in the late 1840s and acquired by Charles H. Nimitz in 1855. It Casino Hall became the center of Fredericksburg‚Äôs social life. Travel salesmen could display their wares, and a bathhouse reportedly offered the only hot baths between San Antonio and El Paso. A number of families from Houston and Galveston spent their summers there. More notable guests were President Rutherford B. Hayes, General Robert E. Lee, General Sheridan, Horace Greeley, William Sydney Porter, Adolphus W. Greely, President Ulysses S. Grant, Fitzhugh Lee, and General James T. Longstreet. Nimitz willed the hotel to his son, Charles, Jr., in 1906. The elder Nimitz continued to live there until his death in 1911. - Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. "," http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/NN/ccn1.html (accessed August 24, 2010). It was for Charles Nimitz that Katherine Hahn cleaned rooms and learned her trade as an innkeeper. According to Estella Hahn, he was often seen in the evenings relieving himself from the upper balcony into the street below and saving himself a trip down the stairs to the bathhouse.

[^165]: Katherine Hahn Zimmermann, or Lena as she was called by her friends, had been on her own since 1892, being disowned by her family after becoming pregnant at the age of 18, for she had brought disgrace and shame to them. She did not marry the father as was expected, or he chose not to marry her. She chose to rear her child herself. Lena Hahn had been born in 1874 and had grown up along Pecan Creek, an area a dozen miles west of town. Four more children followed her departure from home. These were born in 1895, 1897, 1901, and 1904, all fathered by different men and none of whom were willing to marry her. She earned money to support her growing family by cleaning houses and eventually took a job at Captain Nimitz‚Äôs Hotel. While working there, she realized that she could probably earn more by renting a house and taking in borders and cooking their meals. Consequently, she began herown boarding house by renting houses here and there throughout town and even moving her family to Kerrville in 1905 where she 144 became a neighbor and friend to Charles and Florence Butt. Florence, like Lena, was raising her children practically alone as her husband was stricken with tuberculosis and unable to work or help her as she became an agent for the A&P Tea Company, taking and delivering grocery orders door-to-door. Returning to Fredericksburg, now with five children in tow, she was finally married to Otto Zimmermann around 1909, a cigar maker who worked when he felt like it for the Jacob Kraus Cigar Company. Otto and Lena had four more children. By 1917, she was operating out of a two-story wooden house on West San Antonio Street. There she largely ran the boarding house with the help of her older children. Otto, too, had five children of his own, and it is doubtful that with that many mouths to feed that there was much left over at the end of the month. It also did not help that Otto apparently worked only when he wanted to and reportedly spent the winters in bed as Lena doted on him, much to the resentment of her children, including those fathered by Otto. Lena, however, was a good cook and her reputation for providing hearty meals to friends and strangers was legendary and cheap. As was the custom at that time, mid-mornings and mid-afternoons, meant Kaffee Klatsch. Everyone took a time out for coffee and freshly-made Fettkrefel (doughnuts: many were simply made in the traditional way, but also many that were twisted and fried. These looked like twisted braids.) A large rectangular deep roasting pan full of hot, sugared, doughnuts was made and set upon the table. A large coffee pot was always on her wooden stove, and her kitchen was always open to the many neighbors, friends, and acquaintances who made it a point to drop in each and every day to gather around the kitchen table for Gem√ºdlichkeit at it best. Later, when Lena operated the Central Hotel across from the courthouse, Lena‚Äôs legendary cooking would win her the contract to feed the county‚Äôs prisoners. She and her children, including Estella, delivered meals to the old jail three times daily. They were, without a doubt, the best-fed prisoners in the state. But, on this late August evening, she was soon about to be tested by a smartly dressed, if disheveled at this time from walking from the depot, a gentleman with a decidedly German accent.

[^166]: The larger of these ma tching two-piece steamer trunks miraculously survived years in smokehouses, barns, and warehouses. The larger of the two, after have been in his daughter‚Äôs home for more than a quarter century in Texas City, is now in the home of J.B.‚Äôs granddaughter, Jenny Kay, who, incidentally, now lives in the house J.B. and Estella built out on the farm off Goehmann Lane in 1922.

[^167]: Victory Gardens - In 1917, during the first year of the commission, there were over three million war gardens planted across the United States. To recruit gardeners to its cause, posters were posted in public places. The slogans included, ‚ÄúSow the seeds of victory,‚Äù ‚ÄúWar gardens for victory,‚Äù ‚ÄúWar gardens victorious,‚Äù and ‚ÄúCan the Kaiser.‚Äù The appeal had even reached as far inland as Fredericksburg. ‚Äì Liberty Gardens, Victory Gardens and Survival Gardens by Connie Krochmal - http://www.yardsnacker.com/?p=607 ‚Äì accessed November 30, 2010.

[^168]: Gem√ºtlichkeit ‚Äì German word for a serene atmosphere of tranquility: peace, acceptance, comfortableness.

[^169]: The two-story house still stands at 415 West San Antonio and remains occupied to this day.

[^170]: From November 1917 to April 1918, all "alien enemies" were ordered to register with the U. S. Marshal in their county of residence by order of President Wilson. All of those aliens were any of those persons who had, for whatever reason, not been naturalized. http://skyways.lib.ks.us/genweb/kcgs/alienbyco.htm - accessed May 30, 2009.

[^171]: Katherine Hahn Zimmermann converted to Catholicism upon her marriage to Otto Zimmermann and was rearing the four children in that marriage in the Catholic faith. Estella and her four siblings remained Protestant, Estella having been baptized in Bethany Lutheran Church.

[^172]: Fredericksburg was almost equally split between Protestants and Catholics. Although both Catholics and Protestants worshiped in the first community church (Vereins Kirche), the two separated quickly. The Catholics had developed their own school. Catholic patronized Catholic groceries, such as Knopp and Metzger‚Äôs and Quality Cash Grocery; Protestants bought groceries at those owned by non-Catholics, such as Red & White. The town would also be divided by newspaper readers in just a few years, with the new
Radio Post taking many non-Catholic readers from the Friedrichsburg Wochenbatt. Even at death, Catholics would gravitate to Schaetter‚Äôs Funeral Home and the Protestants to Beckmann‚Äôs. In death, Catholics were buried in the holy concentrated grounds of the Catholic cemetery; Protestants were entered in the city cemetery.

[^173]: Hervey Chesley, Jr. was a young attorney and native of Hamilton County who befriended J.B. and permitted him to study law in his father‚Äôs office. This was a very practical way for anyone wishing to become an attorney. Such an apprentice meant having access to law books, a very necessary tool if one wished to study law. J.B. may also have helped out in the office by doing research for Chesley, Sr. Chesley, Jr. was six years younger than J.B. and had followed in his father‚Äôs footsteps to become an attorney but now only practiced law only when he saw fit and with the United State‚Äôs entry into the war saw an opportunity to serve. He and J.B. travelled to Camp Leon Springs near San Antonio to enlist, but J.B. failed his physical and was rejected by the army. Perhaps that might explain why J.B. and Chesley did not team up as a partnership. Chesley served in the Great War as an artillery captain.
Following the war, he did serve as a court reporter for many years where he mastered shorthand, a skill that helped him greatly in taking down notes on stories he heard others recalling. He recorded thousands of interviews and later authored Adventuring with the Old Timers, Trails Travelled ‚Äì Tales Told, which revealed stories about people of the Hamilton area. His personal papers and collected stories are housed in the Nita Stewart Haley Memorial Library at Midland, Texas. It could be that J.B. and Hervey last saw
one another on J.B.‚Äôs last trip to Arkansas in 1959. Hervey died in 1979. ‚Äì ‚ÄúHervey Chesley Book Faithful to History‚Äù by Bob Miller, The Hamilton Herald-News, - February 7, 1980 ‚Äì accessed July 29, 2009.
http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~gazetteer2000/chesley/chesl_bk.htm.

[^174]: Alfred Petsch - The P. C. stood for Peter Casper. Estella will often jokingly refer to him as Alfred Peter Casper Petsch. Saying it rapidly out loud had a certain ring about it that was funny. Petsch and J.B. would remain life-long rivals and obviously detested each other. As a 14-year-old-boy, I was once sent down to Col. Petsch‚Äôs law office to fetch some important documents for my father. It
was a passage of rites that I had finally attained an age at which I could be entrusted with valuable documents. Entering his office, I could sense that Col. Petsch was astonished and had no intention of handing any papers to me. Was my dad being funny? Keeping an angry eye on me, Col. Petsch snatched up his desk phone and called my dad to question my dad‚Äôs wisdom in sending me to fetch them. I could see his face redden as he heard my dad‚Äôs reply. My father had obviously blistered him and had taken great pleasure in
sucking the colonel into his trap. It confirmed to me that J.B. had planned the whole thing just to irritate the colonel. The colonel quickly handed me the documents with no further comment save to wave me out of his office. I really felt proud and pleased as I delivered them safely to my father. Our eyes caught one another, perhaps he raised one of his eyebrows, but he said nothing to confirm his game.

[^175]: The Fredericksburg Standard ‚Äì April, 1918.

[^176]: February Term of the Grand Jury Report ‚Äì The Fredericksburg Standard ‚Äì 1918.

[^177]: Ernst C. Hansen, 33, was only 3 years older than J.B. and was an immigrant from Denmark who had dabbled in real estate. He served as a Loyalty Ranger from July 12, 1918 to February 21, 1919 in Gillespie County. The Texas Legislature had enacted laws that allowed local commissioner courts to appoint as many as three Special Rangers. Gillespie County felt that appointing one Loyalty Ranger was enough. Very often these appointments led to vigilantism in other sections of the state. During World War I, 800
Loyalty Rangers were added to the ranks of Texas Rangers and acted as a secret service branch of the Rangers. Harris and Sadler‚Äôs Texas Rangers, http://www.rimrockpress.com/blog/index.php?entry=entry050802-142847 ‚Äì accessed June 7, 2009, Harris, Charles H, Frances E. Harris, and Louis R. Sadler, ‚ÄúTexas Ranger Biographies,‚Äù p. 165. Service Records, Texas State Ranger Force, Archives
and Information Services Division, Texas State Library, Austin, Texas; Ald, e, f, g; A2a, b; A3a.


[^178]: In J.B.‚Äôs possession at his death would be a number of pistols, among them an 1860 Colt, an ivory-handled 32 Smith and Wesson, and another long barreled 44. Of the latter two, J.B. claimed each had been used by their owners to kill themselves. He either purchased these or acquired them and others when serving as county attorney or county judge.

[^179]: The Fredericksburg Standard ran numerous rather mundane activities each week noting who had done what. If one were considered an important person, others could read that this or that prominent citizen came to town on business for the day, even if it were someone from Harper buying groceries. It became quite clear who the paper thought were Fredericksburg‚Äôs leading citizens. Alfred P. C. Petsch was one of its owners. Not until 1920 did the paper ever mention that ‚ÄúAttorney J. B. Wieser returned from San
Antonio last Friday. He had spent several days in the city on business.‚Äù - Fredericksburg Standard ‚Äì May 15, 1920.

[^180]: The witnesses that eventually gave sworn testimony in the trial were Eugene Ochs, Fritz Joseph, and Alfons Walter. Ernst C. Hansen also testified. ‚Äì Cause No. 997, District Clerk Records, Gillespie County District Clerk‚Äôs Office, Fredericksburg, Texas.

[^181]: Alien Enemies are barred from Being Notaries Public: ‚ÄúAttorney General Decides That Unnaturalized Men Have No Political Rights,‚Äù The Fredericksburg Standard, February 3, 1918. ‚Äú‚Ä¶some of the population (in Gillespie County) has been quietly sending its law business to the unnaturalized lawyers, proving that the outward veneer of loyalty is not sincere and that way down deep this class sympathizes with those who may be
secretly known or thought to be out of harmony with the United States and its war aims.‚Äù San Antonio Express, Austin Edition, February 7, 1918.

[^182]: The influential friend who may have come to his rescue was none other than L. William Menger, Editor of The Southern Messenger, a San Antonio Catholic newspaper.182 J.B. knew Mr. Menger well enough to list him as a reference when he filed his application with the State Department in 1916. He had befriended J.B. while he was studying English, Spanish, and American business at Mitchell‚Äôs Business College in San Antonio for 8 ¬Ω months during 1914-1915. In all reality, it was men like Menger who appreciated the
intelligence of J.B., and the two may have experienced many late-night story-telling sessions, for this was the world in which J.B. excelled. There is no doubt that Menger would have been aware of J.B.‚Äôs dilemma and would have come to his assistance without hesitation.

[^183]: The members of the jury were 1-Chas. Houy, 2- Albert Rusche, 3-Louis C. Jung, 4- Adolph Hartmann, 5- Emil Mund, 6- Max Sch√∂newolf, 7- Fred Gold, 8- William H. M√∂llering, 9- Chas. Schumann, 10- Albert Immel, 11 ‚Äì William Hahn, Sr., 12- Hugo Henke. ‚Äì Cause No. 997, District Clerk, Gillespie County, Texas.

[^184]: J.B., when a child, jumped from the second story of his father‚Äôs barn to avoid being caught by him. In the fall he injured his right hand, losing forever feelings in two of his fingers on his right hand. He later learned to type using just the index fingers of both hands. This defect was sufficient to excuse him from being accepted into the army.

[^185]: Sedition Act of 1918 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sedition_Act_of_1918 - accessed September 19, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Sedition Act of 1918.

[^186]: Sedition Act of 1918.

[^187]: Southern Messenger ‚Äì The English-language Catholic newspaper published by Wm. L. Menger. See Prologue, n 25, page 14.

[^188]: Sedition Act of 1918.

[^189]: A new Era for Cincinnati Catholics

[^190]: Ibid.

[^191]: Ibid.

[^192]: ‚ÄúA Blockade of Germany after 11 November 1918,‚Äù - http://1914-1918.invisionzone.com/forums/index.php?showtopic=587 ‚Äì accessed September 14, 2008. Here after referenced as ‚Äì A Blockade of Germany.

[^193]: Why Germany Lost.

[^194]: Ibid.

[^195]: The Politics of Hunger.

[^196]: Ibid.

[^197]: Ibid.

[^198]: Ibid.

[^199]: Why Germany Lost.

[^200]: Ibid.

[^201]: The Politics of Hunger.

[^202]: Why Germany Lost.

[^203]: Ibid.

[^204]: Why Germany Lost.

[^205]: A Blockade of Germany.

[^206]: The Politics of Hunger.

[^207]: Ibid.

[^208]: Ibid.

[^209]: Ibid.

[^210]: Ibid.

[^211]: Ibid.

[^212]: Ibid.

[^213]: The Politics of Hunger.

[^214]: Wooster, Ralph A., Life on the Texas Home Front, p. 155.

[^215]: Ibid. p. 156.

[^216]: Kolta, Gina: The Story of the Great Influenza Pandemic of 1918. New York, 1999. A History of Disease and Death, p. 51. Hereafter referenced as Kolta ‚Äì Great Pandemic of 1918.

[^217]: Kolta ‚Äì Great Pandemic of 1918., p. 53.

[^218]: German-American in Times of Stress.

[^219]: A New Era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^220]: Blue Laws ‚Äì A blue law restricted activities or sales of goods on Sunday to accommodate the Christian Sabbath. They also protected Christian business owners from competition. Texas blue laws prohibited selling house wares such as pots, pans, and washing machines on Sunday until 1985, although dealerships in the state continue to operate under bluelaw prohibitions. ‚Äì Alcohol: Problems and Solutions - http://www2.potsdam.edu/hansondj/Controversies/1095380608.html - accessed November 25, 2010.

[^221]: A New Era for Cincinnati Catholics.

[^222]: Penned in the wake of America‚Äôs entry into World War One, this song was written by Joe Young and Sam M. Lewis with music by Walter Donaldson and was published in 1918. A huge popular success at the time the song was performed by a great many artists in the immediate postwar years. ‚Äì firstworldwar.com - http://www.firstworldwar.com/audio/howyagonna.htm - accessed November 25, 2010.


[^223]: Tippens, Matthew D., Turning Germans into Texans.

[^224]: Ibid.

[^225]: ‚ÄúHow ‚ÄòYa Gonna Keep ‚ÄòEm Down on the Farm?‚Äù - http://www.usgennet.org/usa/mo/county/stlouis/ww1-
music/downonthefarm.htm - accessed November 25, 2010. MIDI file copy courtesy of Benjamin Tubb