---
layout: ../../layouts/Post.astro
title: J.B., Export Salesman and Texas Oil Speculator
subtitle: Chapter VII
---

J.B.'s first years in America were not what he had envisioned. Many in
Fredericksburg now knew of his arrest, and he felt their cold stares
that seemed to be directed toward him with greater animosity than ever
before. Returning to his office in the Gold Building without running
into Colonel Petsch and his henchman, Loyalty Ranger Hansen, on occasion
could not have made him feel comfortable, for they shared offices on the
same floor. Reclaiming clients from among the townspeople was not easy
following his arrest and trial. Only time would heal their suspicions
and distrust, and only time would convince them that he had not been a
German spy. Doubts in the minds of many about another's patriotism
faded very slowly. He had worked hard at trying to promote his fledgling
practice. He had started with an innocence and eagerness that one
typically found among anyone proud at starting a new business. Upon
arriving in town, he aggressively had begun to advertise in the
*Friedrichsburg Wochenblatt* or the front page of *The
Fredericksburg Standard*. Now he resumed his quest for restarting
his practice. Locals could not have escaped noticing his first ads, for
he purchased space at the top-most position on the front page.
Amazingly, he had continued to run those ads even after the United
States declared war on Germany in April 1917 and after enemy aliens had
been forbidden to work in the United States by an executive order issued
by President Wilson. All that changed after his arrest, and his ads were
conspicuously missing beginning at the start of 1918. It would be a long
wait, but there was nothing that he could do.

<pre>
+----------------------------------------------+
| J. B. WIESER                                 |
|                                              |
| LAWYER                                       |
|                                              |
| Gold Building, Room 12 Fredericksburg, Texas |
+----------------------------------------------+
</pre>

**Advertisement placed in *The Fredericksburg Standard*** [^1]


What J.B. did for most of 1918 is unknown. His only reference was made
some years later when he wrote that he had to subsist on his savings.
Knowing his passion for cards he probably spent a lot of time playing
skat or high low jack and game [^2], two card games popular among locals,
and perhaps a lot of dominoes. He may simply have hung around his
boarding house enjoying *Kaffeeklatsches* and conversations with others
there. Perhaps he took to wandering in the country, something he had
liked to do in Germany; however, he had to be constantly on his guard
that his actions could not be interrupted as those of being a spy, for
the anti-German sentiment was reaching deep into the Texas Hill Country.
In all likelihood he may have spent a lot of time reflecting on his
first four years in his newly adopted country and whether he had made
the right decision. More likely, he spent his time reading and
continuing to improve his English while keeping a keen eye on events
both in America and Texas. And, perhaps he had time to get closely
acquainted with that young girl who had admitted him to her mother's
boarding home that late August evening the year before.

To while away his time day after day made 1918 a very long year, for the
war would not end until that November. He had even admitted in a letter
home that the practice of law did not appeal to him, for it appeared to
him that it only required him to do something for others, something that
he admitted he found distasteful. He grew restless from waiting, but
when all sides in the European conflict finally agreed to an Armistice,
it appeared that things would return to normal. When the ban on working
was lifted, his practice was in tatters, and he had already concluded
that the prospect of winning back clients would take months. Certainly,
his fellow cronies, who shared the second floor of the Gold Building,
had hoped that he would soon move away. He had also known that he needed
to find some way to earn money, or he might be forced to once again ask
for assistance from his relatives in Hamilton. He had no money for
making a down payment on purchasing a business or investing in property,
which placed a handicap upon him. With no source of making money, he
could buy nothing. He had only his labor to sell, but only his cousins
had positions for bookkeeping, and no business in Fredericksburg was
large enough to offer such positions. Fortunately, the time he had spent
waiting was also occupied by reading, and he was keenly more aware of
what was happening in Texas than most of those around him. When the war
ended, he was ready to launch a new career, and he wasted no time in
getting started that December 1918.

Newspapers throughout the war had reported of huge oil discoveries in
Texas. The oil boom was on and sweeping the state! Oil was found west of
Burkburnett in Wichita County in 1912, followed by another oil field in
the town itself in 1918.Between 1902 and 1910, still before J.B.'s
arrival, oil fever spread through North Central Texas, with finds at
Brownwood, Petrolia, and Wichita Falls. But what did that mean for him?
That the Texas oil boom was huge was an understatement in 1919. It was
gigantic and getting larger each day! As in all booms, a frantic fear of
being left behind gripped those who feared of being too late to
participate. Texas was in the thralls of a boom and growing in ways no
one could have imagined. Oil towns that were instantly populated, not by
hundreds but by thousands, appeared to materialize from nowhere, and
they sprang up seemingly overnight upon the news of every new strike.
Some would remain as cities when the oil ran out, but for many, their
history paralleled those of so many boomtowns of the gold rush day:
here, thriving today, but only until the easy access to riches lasted.
Most became ghost towns, some that still stand as tattered reminders of
events that caught the passion of thousands as they sought to grasp a
piece of the wealth that they generated. For now, however, it seemed as
if everyone in Texas was getting into the act or so it seemed. Even J.B.
was ready to play as well, for he had seen an opportunity for which he
was skilled and that did not require much cash outlay. He had spent his
idle time well, studying the strategy that he would pursue when given
the opportunity to proceed. After all, that was what he had already
discovered about America and written home about: "Anyone could become
anything." Only one's lack of imagination prevented an avenue to
success. J.B. was determined not to miss this opportunity.

<center>

![Spindle Top Oil Wells -- Beaumont, Texas](/assets/images/chapters/7/spindle.jpg)

**Spindle Top Oil Wells [^4] -- Beaumont, Texas** [^3]

</center>

There was opportunity, of course, for those unique individuals, those
wildcatters ---gamblers, who risked everything or could, borrow or
finance the costs of rigs for drilling. They drilled everywhere, for
geologists had not yet perfected detecting oil beneath the ground into a
true science. Many lost everything. That was simply the way it was with
booms. Before Spindle Top,[^5] oil had practically been scooped from pools
at the surface. Now drilling was the new application, and oil
speculators were willing to drill anywhere and everywhere. Fortunes were
made and lost by many as the race to find oil matched and exceeded that
of the gold fever that had recently played such an important role in the
growth of the American West. The gold had always seemed to have been
farther and farther west, driving fortune hunters more and more into
remote regions of unexplored country and often inaccessible rivers and
mountains. Nevertheless, people who followed the gold and searched for
wealth were no different from those now in the search for black gold.
Texas was the focus of the world, and J.B. was living right in the
middle of it. Oil could be anywhere, and a few lucky homeowners had even
found it in their backyards. It was being discovered all over Texas,
even in places never having before been suspected of hiding vast lakes
of oil beneath their forlorn, desolated surfaces. And, perhaps even
right here in Gillespie County, there lay an underground lake of oil.

Many who wanted into the oil business could not play with big rigs but
soon supplied tools or equipment to those who could. Some offered to
build the pipelines necessary to move the oil from the wells. Others
built storage tanks or offered transport to the refineries that were
springing up along the Texas coast. There seemed to be no end to
opportunity at any level. Only one's lack of imagination to make oneself
an indispensible part of the boom limited one's participation. Of
course, as in every boom, history has shown that many arrived who set
out to take advantage of those who worked the rigs and in the fields,
for they needed food and clothing and other necessities just as those
that were needed in cities and town. General stores, cafes, hotels, auto
repair, and gas stations were always present as were the saloons and
women who plied their trade. Texas Rangers were often called upon to
restore law and order, but the hunt for wealth continued, and no
obstacles stood in the way of some. The Old West had just reinvented
itself in a newer form.

Others, like J.B., discovered that they could play a role in finding oil
in their immediate areas. Millions of acres of land were suspected of
holding the potential of oil and the wealth that it promised. Securing
the rights to millions of these acres of land for exploration required
little investment of capital. Everyone could become a winner, and
everyone, with or without land, could participate. For a few dollars,
paid cash in hand, few landowners refused a chance to offer their lands
for exploration for drilling. A lease was a chance to own a piece of a
producing well, to participate in the oil boom. It cost the landowner
nothing, perhaps only a recording fee. Everyone could participate as
thousands across Texas had done. It was an easy and simple procedure. By
agreeing to sign a lease for as little as one year and receiving cash
upon signing, landowners were foolish not to permit test drilling on
their land. Everyone kept their fingers crossed that the land they and
their families had struggled to hold on to for decades now might make
life a little easier for them. For those who owned no land, there was
also opportunity, and J.B. quickly realized what only a few others,
mostly other struggling attorneys, were doing; they were writing and
leasing those unexplored and potential oil-rich fields that lay beneath
them. One, in particular, who was not going to allow J.B. to corner this
market in the county, was of course, Colonel Petsch. The Colonel quickly
formed the Gillespie County Oil Development Company. The race was on!
The Gillespie County Oil Development Company received all the press and
attention. Of course, Colonel Petsch was one of the investors in *The
Fredericksburg Standard* so that was natural, but competition did not
phase J.B., and he might have welcomed it, for it demonstrated a marked
difference in approaching landowners. The Gillespie County Oil
Development Company advertised for people to invest in it. The money was
used eventually to drill in Gillespie County. J.B. preferred to visit
landowners in person and one by one. He asked no one to invest or risk
their money.

Attorneys were well-qualified for writing leases. If they had experience
in writing deeds and creating other legal documents, writing a lease was
a simple thing to create, for they required only a few essential
elements. For those unskilled in legal gibberish, a short, fashionable
pre-printed standard lease form flooded the state, making it an even
easier task.[^6] Anyone could complete a lease by simply filling in the
blanks. That probably did not make most attorneys happy, for now no
expert legal wizard was required to execute a lease legally and
correctly. Fortunately for them, most people still feared legal forms,
and the vast majority of people never realized the opportunity that lay
at hand. Perhaps the one thing hindering most was having the knowledge
of how to acquire the cash to play and pay for those leases upon signing. Promissory notes were not
accepted by landowners conditioned on discovering oil. Few landowners
failed to understand that leasing their lands required receiving a
payment up front just as a rent payment was required for a house before
moving in. The additional advantage to the landowner was that the actual
discovery of oil triggered a percentage of the production and was
conditioned upon the oil company to make all possible effort to extract
it, for time was on the side of the landowner. It was a no-lose
proposition.

Consequently, cash was required for securing any lease and paid upon
signing. Terms were short, very short! Most were made for a term of only
one year, for landowners did not wish to wait years for those purchasing
the lease to begin testing or even drilling. Nor was it the objective of
the oil speculators to tie up lands forever. Everyone wanted to get rich
quickly. The clock began to run upon signing, and it was in every sense
a race to fulfill its terms or lose it. If the oil company failed to
explore its lease within the term offered, it simply expired. A new
lease would be required, extended, or offered to another competing oil
company. Actually finding oil on one piece of land could mean other land
owners in the vicinity could offer leases for more money. There was some
risk in signing too soon. Some landowners, of course, chose to wait and
see, but it was all a gamble: to play or to wait. After all, if a
neighbor struck oil, chances improved significantly on finding oil on
adjoining lands, and more money was offered for leasing it, or perhaps a
larger percentage of the strike was demanded by the landowner. It was as
much of a race for an oil company to sign as many leases in the area as
possible as it was for the landowner to offer a maximum amount of
acreage to be leased. On the other hand, oil companies wished to
minimize having to pay more for leases in the area in the event an oil
field was discovered and drove the frenzy by buying as many leases in an
area as possible. In reality, as in any boom, there was much hype and
anticipation, but many farmers and ranchers were falling all over
themselves to sign leases despite never really expecting oil speculators
to find any oil. If some oil companies were willing to pay good money
for a year to check out their property, they were not going to be so
foolish to refuse even if they suspected there was none. Fools and their
money were soon separated, and in the end, almost all who were buying
the leases became the losers. That was the gamble and somewhere,
someplace in Texas, some would strike oil. That was the way it was with
all booms. The Texas Oil Boom was no different.

<center>

![The Fredericksburg Standard 1920](/assets/images/chapters/7/standard.jpg)

**The Fredericksburg Standard 1920** [^7]
</center>

For those seeking to purchase leases, having no cash became a problem,
but that stopped only those incapable of finding ways to acquire it.
J.B. was among those who had no money whatsoever, for not working for
most of 1918 had left him with little money, and he had needed that for
food and shelter. It really did not matter to those who wished to
participate in this boom at this level whether or not they sat on a pile
of money. Nor did it matter that their total worth hardly filled their
penny banks. Almost an endless supply of cash was required or at a
minimum, access to one. J.B. had understood this and had done his
homework. He was armed and ready when permitted to enter the fray. He
had sought his money directly from a number of oil companies and had
discovered that it was not difficult. Among those that had agreed to
underwrite him were Hurst Oil & Refinery, the San Francisco Oil Company,
BPF Oil Company, and an individual by the name of J. D. Walter.[^8] When
finally permitted to legally begin work, he was ready and armed with
what seemed to him a limitless supply of capital. It was not his, of
course, but just as for those willing to lease him their property for
cash and a percentage, he was willing to sell those leases for a
percentage to the oil companies sponsoring him. He was working on a
commission. His only limitation lay in his ability to get as many leases
as he could. Perhaps, at last, America would prove to be his land of
opportunity. J.B.'s competition, however, was also quickly signing
leases. It became quite difficult to know what properties were not yet
leased. It became even more difficult when leases were not recorded. It
seemed that everyone was getting into the act so Gillespie County Clerk
purchased a special book in which to begin recording the oil and gas
leases being signed. Now, every attorney and others who were joining
this oil rush found themselves spending much time in the courthouse
having their leases recorded. It was as if there was a mini-gold rush
happening.

For Texas oil companies and wealthy individuals who had money, hiring or
sending their own employees out to sign leases was not sufficiently fast
enough in this boom to secure as many leases as possible. The stakes,
after all, were unimaginably huge and of unknown heights - a prize so
unbelievably huge that few could ignore. It was much like a frantic
gambler's addiction to gambling.

To hesitate or to ignore an area of the state could mean one lost out on
a discovery. The solution to their problem was to make cash available to
hundreds across Texas. J.B. may have recognized this or simply have
happened on this thought process coincidentally. However it may have
happened, for once J.B. was in the right place at the right time. When
he approached the oil companies to underwrite his leases, they were
ready to accept the services being offered by him. Many oil companies
had also reasoned that by signing on locals in areas who lived among and
understood their neighbors, they were more likely to convince landowners
into signing. The logic made sense. Locals were more likely to listen to
people they knew than some swift-talking speculator descending upon a
community. Consequently, those who were playing the oil schemes like a
high-stakes poker game that it was, ponied up an endless supply of
dollars and made it available to some very small-time players. They
would guarantee to buy as many leases as their agents or others could
sign, file in the appropriate counties, and bring the leases in to their
company headquarters. Most of the money paid for leases, of course,
would be lost in areas that held no oil, and the gamblers knew that, but
if they played a large enough area across the state, they stood a good
chance of striking oil somewhere that made the gamble seem a sure bet. [^9]
J.B. soon discovered that this was an area in which he was well suited.
He had a natural ability to carry on a one-to-one relationship with
farmers and ranchers throughout the county. It was an area in which he
excelled. He found a rapport among landowners that others, especially
other local attorneys, could not match. He could talk to landowners
about things that interested them at their levels. He spoke with them,
not at them. Skillfully, he knew when to make his pitch without making
them feel disenfranchised. His sincerity convinced them of the
opportunity that awaited them while requiring little from them. After
signing, landowners pocketed a nice signing bonus, and they felt as if
they were part of the team. Getting out into the county also gave J.B.
an opportunity to see and meet more people than he had had the
opportunity to meet in town. They appeared to be more hearty and honest
and not as uppity or condescending toward him as those living in town
had treated him. He saw that farming and ranching was a way of life to
them as well as their sole means of existence. He began to understand
the value of what it meant to own property. He also discovered that few,
very few, had been able to send their children off to get an education
beyond the schooling that the 50 or so county country schools offered.
Just as all across America, large families were still needed to help on
the farm. His experiences and ability to describe opportunities gained
through an education may have given many landowners hope for a better
life, but only by signing could they participate. Meanwhile, the dollars
left in their hands cemented the deal that offered tangible proof that
there was hope and opportunity, and that the man who offered them that
chance was one of their own. J.B. was winning a respect from these
hardworking folks few townsfolk would ever acknowledge.[^10]

Beginning the process of going out into the county to visit with
landowners was not yet a sure thing, for J.B. had no means of
transportation. Texas was far larger than Germany, and her cities and
towns were much farther apart. Moreover, there was not a vast rail
network that linked many places together. It still abounded with much
open country in 1919, throughout which were scattered a few larger
cities, smaller towns and communities, and many thousands of remote
farms and ranches of all sizes. Getting from one place in this vast
state to another required a means of transportation that few could
afford and still fewer understood. Although men in America, such as
Ford, Olds, the "Dodge Brothers," and dozens of others, were putting
Americans on wheels, it was only a matter of time before good roads
linked not only the larger cities in Texas, but also those smaller towns
and communities that were scattered throughout the state of Texas. J.B.
had, until now, seen very little of Texas. His one way trip to Hico from
Galveston by way of Houston had not been revisited since his arrival in 1914.    Getting from one place to another had been possible only by rail, but that was changing. He had enjoyed living in San Antonio and felt it
a city much to his liking, but the war had driven him into the Texas
Hill Country and as a German alien, he was trapped there until the war
was over. Now he had more reason than ever to explore what lay beyond
the town he had chosen, at least for now, to put down roots and to open
his practice. What he required now was an automobile, or he would not be
able to implement what he had waited months to begin executing.

J.B. was no stranger to cars but had not yet mastered driving or
obtained a license. He had seen the few wealthier Germans drive their
new automobiles down to the resort areas along Lake Constance when he
worked in Langenargen, and he had even seen more and more cars on the
streets of Stuttgart as he had sought employment there between
1912-1914, but the need for them was not the same as in America. America
was different, however, and Henry Ford was changing that through his
adaptation of mass production and bringing the price of an automobile
into almost everyone's range. Vincent had purchased an automobile by 1914. Given permission to drive it, J.B. had difficulty navigating a  bridge, and the car went over the side. It nearly may have cost him his
life. Fortunately, jumping saved him from being dunked in the river. [^11]
His cousins probably wished otherwise. By 1919, owning a car was rapidly
no longer considered a toy for the rich. More were beginning to be seen
on the streets of Fredericksburg. J.B. now required one, even if only a
used one, if he intended to be successful in the oil business.

Arriving in Fredericksburg by train, he had noticed the many oil storage
tanks that stood along the western-most end of the tracks at the depot,
but that sight meant nothing to him at the time. Nor could he not have
escaped the number of service stations that already abounded along San
Saba and other streets leading into the town, but now J.B. realized the
connection with them and the oil boom sweeping the state. Fredericksburg
was still the way west to El Paso, and the Hotel Nimitz was still famous
for travelers heading west, but now it catered to those traveling by
car. Pumping gas was a part of the oil business that forever transformed
towns across America.[^12] It also offered opportunities for many to escape
from being trapped on the farm. As all across America, owning an
automobile was no longer becoming the exclusive toys of the rich. More
and more people in Fredericksburg were buying their first cars, and a
sufficient supply of used cars began to appear in the new auto
dealerships. Many local service stations also dabbled in selling used
cars; maintenance contracts were still unheard of as cars were sold "as
is." J.B. bought his first used car from Herman C. Fischer, who owned
and ran his new Ideal Service Station at the corner of North Washington
and East San Saba Street. J.B. proudly drove it to his boarding house to
show it off.[^13] And now, of course, those who had always looked upon that
brash new German in town had much more gossip to whisper to their
neighbors.

<center>

![Oil and Gas Map of Texas -- 2005](/assets/images/chapters/7/oil.jpg)

**Oil and Gas Map of Texas -- 2005** [^14]


</center>





It was a significant investment for J.B., and as all cars at the time,
his ledger reflected that it was in constant need of repair. Early
engines apparently used a lot of oil, and to make a trip to a
neighboring town without at least one flat was unheard of as roads in
the area remained unpaved. Even San Saba Street, the main street in
town, remain unpaved for years. Traveling to Kerrville or Comfort
required considerable time on roads that were often littered with sharp
rocks that apparently penetrated tires with ease. No one traveled
without a spare. Tire patches and a tire pump were necessary equipment
carried on all cars and on all trips made by car, no matter how short.
It was all part of a new age, and those who used such transportation
probably thought nothing of it, for cars had become a necessary evil and
a part of doing business whether anyone liked it or not. If J.B.
intended to be competitive with others securing leases, he knew he had
to buy a car for himself and to keep one in running shape. Strangely,
J.B. had become a part of what was making the oil boom in America such a
revolutionary success.

J.B. covered the county in his second-hand Maxwell, which was classified
as a touring car,[^15] visiting ranches and farms, spending hours
conversing with their owners, and convincing them to participate with
him in the huge and exiting oil boom sweeping
the state. He was also really truly seeing for the first time what
owning land really meant, and he knew from that point on that he wanted
more than just the 40 acres he had purchased in 1916 and still had not
seen. The time for that would come, however, for now he work to do.
These visits introduced him to the heart and soul of the descendents of
those early settlers who had risked everything to survive in this part
of Texas. He was also introducing himself in a way he had never done
before. One on one, J.B. proved to many to be a likeable man, and above
all else, an honest one. He shared his ideas about opportunities and won
many over to sign leases to their lands. Most impressive, however, he
handed them cash at signing, the amount of which varied depending on the
amount of acreage being leased.[^16] He did not have to reveal from where
it came. Many may have well thought it was his and that he was making
his own personal investment in their lands. Every lease was purchased in
his name and so duly recorded in the new Oil & Gas ledger kept in the
county clerk's office. It won him much respect and the support that he
would reap later when seeking elective office. His strongest support in
later years always came from the rural areas of the county. Those
descendents of the pioneers saw what kind of man J.B. was, and they
liked what they saw. For the first time since arriving in town, he was
bonding with those who lived in the county.

Thus armed with a little cash and an automobile, J.B. entered the oil
business at the end of 1918. He rode the boom as long as it lasted,
wrote as many leases as he possibly could, and decided that he would see
where this led him next. It would occupy him for most of the next two
years. It now meant carefully keeping books, but he was well-skilled at
that. Bookkeeping, accounting, reporting, and filing leases with the
county clerks in these counties were easy tasks for him. He secured over
55,000 acres of oil leases in Gillespie County. As he had grown
accustomed to approaching prospective land owners, he expanded only into
Llano County, where he secured 35,052 acres and to Mason County to
record 4,111 acres of those included in Llano's for a total close to
95,000 acres. He failed, however, to do the same for some lying in
Blanco County. He recorded no leases in Kendall or Kerr Counties and
seemed to have concentrated only in Gillespie County and with people
with whom he had become acquainted as clients or otherwise and who owned
lands that lay in other surrounding counties. But even with this limited
area, he began to make regular trips into Texas' largest cities,
Houston, San Antonio, and Dallas. There he met with his oil partners and
brought home the money he earned on selling his leases. He was now
earning a profit, albeit a small one, but expenses for meals, hotels,
gas, and oil were all carefully noted for each trip and as an
accountant, he knew the value of keeping an accurate track of expenses
required for filing the new the new Federal Income Tax [^17] recently
ratified by the states. But, that remained a minor irritation for J.B.
at that time; for he was astonished and irritated to think that the
government could take 3% of one's income. As it turned out, 1919 was
looking to be a very good year. Perhaps he might even learn news of home
now that the British were finally being pressured by the Americans to
lift their insidious blockade on Germany.

<center>

![Advertisement from *The Fredericksburg Standard](/assets/images/chapters/7/oilgas.jpg)

*Advertisement from The Fredericksburg Standard* [^18]

</center>


As J.B. was driving around the county securing leases in 1919 and 1920,
he had high hopes that oil might be discovered here. Speculators were
everywhere. Oil and gas leases required 9 volumes in Mason County, and 4
volumes in Llano, and even more in Kerr County. Everyone was searching
and hoping. Then new oil was discovered, but this time it was in the
Panhandle starting in 1921; soon other major fields were developed all across the
state during the next decade -- East Texas, West-Central Texas, and
additional fields in the Gulf Coast. [^19] Spindletop was the first well in
this field that broke all records for oil in the United States. It
proved to be the forerunner of the greatest gas field in the world and
one of the greatest oil fields. And, it appeared to end the search for
oil in Gillespie County. The well was drilled to a depth of 2,605 feet
and had an initial production of ten million cubic feet of gas daily. [^20]
At least two wells were drilled in western Gillespie County, but the
depth to which they went is unknown. Drilling a test well was the one
sure way to discover the chances for oil. Failure to drill also
terminated the lease within one year. Apparently many oil speculators
buying the leases from J.B. and others knew that they could not even
afford to drill, but they could not afford to pass up securing acreage.
An interest in oil developed throughout the Hill Country in 1919, and
the first oil and gas lease was taken out that year. J.B. was the third
to file a lease there; however, as in Gillespie County, the mineral
industry in Mason County never grew to significant proportions.[^21] During
the 1920s, there were discoveries near Mexia in Limestone County and
more in Navarro County. [^22] In September 1918, drillers struck oil, and a
small farming community of Desdemona was catapulted into a bona fide
Texas boomtown.[^23]
Had oil been found in Gillespie County, Fredericksburg would have
changed in ways other boomtowns did. Population estimates of the period
suggest that there may have been as many as 16,000 citizens,
speculators, workers, and camp followers during the zenith of the
1919-1922 boom in Desdemona.[^24] Desdemona, like dozens of other small
communities, became a city overnight, repeating the history of all
boomtowns, incurring lawlessness and prosperity for those venturous
enough to risk it. It must have been and a phenomenon that J.B. thought
was only possible in this remarkable country. The map of Texas shows
where oil and gas were eventually found in Texas. Ironically, J.B. lived
in an area that had either. He had written leases for almost 10% of a
million acres that had no geological chance of containing oil. Had
Fredericksburg been located a little farther north, south, east or west,
how different might have been his life.

J.B. had been able to put most of the problems facing those remaining in
Germany behind him. He had other things to worry about. If those left
behind had not listened, they would have to suffer the consequences.
Because he constantly read so much, he could not have failed to notice
that his warnings about Germany had come true. The British and French
blockade of Germany continued for eight months after the signing of an
armistice. Nothing, absolutely nothing, was permitted to enter or leave
Germany, including mail. The blockade kept thousands of German-Americans
wondering if their families had survived the war or how they were
escaping the starvation that many feared was sweeping their former
homeland. The anti-German hysteria in the United States had been so
great that none dared offer a voice of protest at the extended blockade.
Only Herbert Hoover began to openly criticize the British and the
French. [^25] The additional period must have weighed terribly on Joseph's
conscience. He penned this letter in late July [^1919], the same month the
British were finally forced to lift the blockade, hoping that it might
finally get through. From the letters, it appeared that this was the
first time he had attempted to write in many months which raises the
question as to why he would wait nine months after the end of the war to
write this first letter. Perhaps in his readings he simply knew that
writing was useless; after all, other letters had simply vanished during
the war, intercepted by the British and the French and probably
destroyed. The wait for both sides had to be excruciating and not
without some reservation. J.B. had also demonstrated that he could be
stubborn and withhold writing when angry. It was seldom that he blinked
first. This was one of those few times.

<center>

<h2>J. B. W I E S E R</h2>
Attorney at Law<br/>
Rooms 11 & 12 Gold Building<br/>
Fredericksburg, Texas

</center>

July 22, 1919

Mrs. Maria Wieser

*Tuttlingen*

  > Dear Mother, Brother and Sister,
  > It has been almost four years since I have last heard from you and now
  > that this terrible war is over, I want to inquire as to your welfare. I
  > hope above all that you have survived these difficult years and that you
  > have maintained your health, and that in the next years of rebuilding,
  > the traces of the war will vanish. You must understand that I have no
  > idea as to what conditions may be like over there. For years, we have
  > gotten absolutely no news from Europe. Just how did you survive the last
  > year of the war? Write me all about it soon. How are all the relatives?
  > How many of my comrades were killed in the war? [^26]
  > About me, there is not much of which I have to report, but I can say
  > that the effects of the war here were much less severe than in Europe.
  > It was a difficult time for me as an immigrant because for almost a
  > year, I was unable to work in my profession because it was forbidden.
  > Additionally, I spent almost a week in jail. I experienced times during
  > which I simply did not know how I was going to make it from one month to
  > the next. You can never imagine or predict what fate has in store for
  > you, but I will say this and that is that I hope that I never experience
  > such a time again. Things are going much better again, and I hope in a
  > few years to build up a little practice. I would very much like to make
  > a trip back again, but first I shall have to save up some money* *Did
  > Ernst, who must have served in the war, return from the war in good
  > health? It is a shame that Ernst cannot come over here. I cannot imagine
  > that there is much left for him to do there, and I urge him to make
  > every effort to immigrate. The world is a big place and there is always
  > room for a young man who wants to work. He could immigrate to Mexico or
  > to one of the countries in South America. There are many opportunities
  > in those countries.
  >
  > Of course, I do not even know if it is possible for him to travel out
  > of the country, but where there is a will, a way can always be found.
  > What is Anna doing now? Has she become an office clerk?
  >
  > *With best wishes to all.*
  >
  > *J B Wieser*

The tone of this letter causes one to question J.B.'s thinking. Was this
the kind of letter one expected to read after family members have been
separated by war for years? Would one not have expected more questions?
He revealed nothing of events that affected him during the war, nothing
about moving to Fredericksburg, nothing about his new venture into oil
speculating, nor did he share any light on the reasons for his arrest.
The letter was addressed to his mother, sister, and brother but reads as
if written directly only to his mother. He inquired of Ernst and was the
first in a series of letters that followed suggesting that he saw no
future for Ernst to remain in Germany. However, he cannot talk about
Ernst without negatively implying that perhaps Ernst was not up to
working as hard as he had since 1914.

The letter that follows was written two months later to his sister Anna,
and they crossed paths in route, ironically, a day following the date of
the letter above. It was Anna's first letter to her brother, which he
now answered. Previously all letters had been directed to his mother.
Its delay in reaching J.B. may have been due to forwarding mail from
Joseph's last known address. There was now a lot of catching up to do,
fences to mend, and even a surprise or two. First, there was good news,
for it appeared that his brother, Ernst, not yet 18 for another month,
had survived his service in the war without injuries. Now J.B. seemed to
sense that Ernst had openly voiced solidarity with many of the
socialists advocating revolution. Secondly, apparently Maria, their
mother, had been able to sell a small parcel of the land remaining in
Volkertshausen that Wendelin failed to cash out when he hastily
departed. It was also obvious that his mother, probably angry over a
past admonishment of her by him, was deliberately not writing to him.
Even a four-year-world war could not diminish the anger between them. It
appeared that his mother and her oldest son were like two peas in a pod.
If one can withhold writing as a way of getting even, so can the other.
It also revealed that it was difficult for J.B. to quit critiquing his
brother. Finally, after years of sensing only open hostility from his
cousins in Hamilton, it was astonishing that he announced that he was
actually considering going back to work for his dreaded cousins.

<blockquote>

September 23, 1919

Dear Sister,

I have just recently received your letter of July 23, and it appears to
have been in route for two months. It made me very happy to hear that all of you are well and that
Ernst also returned safely. It makes it easier to forget the bad days of
the war, rather than think how difficult it would have been, had he
returned crippled. Has Ernst grown up to be big and strong, or is he
still that puny little kid that he was earlier? He must be at least
twenty by now, and it would make me quite happy if he would write me a
letter. I have been in this world so long alone that it would make me
feel really good to know that I still have a brother. He should not let
it bother him that earlier I was hard on him from time to time.*

He also should think a little before he voices his opinions about
things. Did he become a true socialist or anarchist? Or is he now
leaving such thought to others?

Mother should soon be satisfied with the four thousand Marks that she
received for the land sale. As you indicate, that should be enough to
last her the rest of her days without worry. I think that Mother is
worrying too much about it, and it is making her miserable. That saddens
me that the situation over there has become so bad. It just appears that
those in the government have lost their heads. I wonder how the
government ever expects the people to get back on their feet again. I
cannot say what the best thing for you to do is. Perhaps, the only thing
to tell you is to leave the country. Once people become crazy, there is
not much that will allow a new beginning.

Ernst should pack his bags. There is enough room in the world for a
young man if he wants only to work, but he needs to get out of the
country. I would not want to come back for only a half a chance to
succeed. Moreover, as God knows, you have had enough bad times. It is
true I did not settle for a half a chance at life, and I feel today as
if I can survive any challenge. I have been an attorney for three years
and can speak English and Spanish. The world lies before me. What
bothers me today is that I did not leave Germany five or ten years
earlier.

I have been an attorney for over two years, but it is not the best
profession to have in this country. A businessman makes much more money.
I do not think that I will practice long. There are just too many
lawyers dividing up the business here. I can do all right at it, but if
I were to go back into business, I could be making around five thousand
dollars a year and would not have to wait until something happened to
someone for which they might need an attorney. I have always hated
having to do someone a favor, and that is just what an attorney does.

Next month I have to make a business trip to Cuba and Puerto Rico and
may be gone for three months. All my expenses are paid, and I will
receive one hundred twenty-five Dollars per month. [^27] A Dollar, which
earlier was worth 4.2 Marks, is probably worth three times that now. I
will probably eventually return to Fredericksburg, but I cannot say for
sure because everything depends on the success of this trip. If things
go well in Cuba for me, I will probably travel to Europe in a year or
two. At least there is talk of sending me there, and if I do have to
travel to Europe, I shall, of course, come home. I have been wondering
what kind of business for flour there might be in Europe, and if I can
trade with strangers in grain, etc., there will be questions and answers
enough when the time comes.

Please write again and greet everyone for me. Just go ahead and write
to my last address. Should I move, all of my mail will be forwarded.

Eventually your letter will reach me, whether that is Hico or Hamilton,
where I am known. Please give my greeting to all and also the other
people in the house where you are living. Tell Mamma she should write me
herself.

### J. B. Wieser

</blockquote>

J.B. acknowledged his relief that his family has survived the war
without personal injuries, yet he instantly launched into an attack on
Ernst. He just could not come to realize that his baby brother might
just have grown up. Nor can he bring himself to be the first write to him. J.B. will repeatedly instruct Anna to have Ernst write him. On one hand, he wished to give him advice about emigrating
from Germany, for he saw no hope for him to stay in Germany, but on the
other, again suspects that Ernst may not have the character to survive
the ordeals that he has had to endure. Ernst has obviously been hurt by
years of taunts and ridicule and chose, for the moment, to ignore J.B.'s
request for a letter. It was some years before he finally acquiesced to
J.B.'s demand. There were hard feelings between them that no mere
request for a letter was able to mend. J.B. certainly understood the
reason for Ernst's refusal and acknowledged his teasing.

J.B.'s advice to get out of Germany may have been correct, but again,
his mother and family refused to take his advice. After all, where would
they have gone if they had fled Germany? They could not even have gone
into Switzerland despite its near proximity, and immigration to the
United States was prohibited for all Germans as J.B. correctly pointed
out. Their mother was simply not able to cope with providing food and
shelter for her children. It appeared to be doubtful that J.B. really
understood that his mother was never able to work after leaving
Volkertshausen and the devastating effect that Wendelin's leaving had
had on her. J.B. may have chosen not wanting to know or simply chose
denial. It had been Anna who supported her mother and brother and who
had sought work anywhere she could find it to make it possible to have
food on their table and for Ernst to complete his grade schooling
uninterrupted in Tuttlingen; J.B. should have known that, for he was
still working in Stuttgart in 1912. [^28]

J.B.'s criticism of Ernst appeared to take on a different twist from
this point on. Why was Ernst not permitted to verbalize his opinions on
events or support some change for Germany? Did J.B. simply feel that
Ernst was too uneducated or lacking in sufficient knowledge to discuss
new ideas? Germany was rife with new solutions and ideas, many of them
radical and revolutionary. These were elements of the most radical
socialist and communists that had taken over Russia in 1917 and forced
her out of the war with Germany. Now these same groups were vying for
support and control of the new German government. They took a lot of
their anger into the streets. Certainly, a lot had changed in the
Germany J.B. had known just four years earlier, when the Army and the
Kaiser ruled supreme. Four years of fighting had now found that some 10
million Europeans lay dead. These losses in human costs combined with
the destruction of land and property led to a European situation of
grave pessimism and poverty for many.[^29] J.B. failed to comprehend their
mother's apprehensions concerning their personal plight. It was not the
4,000 Marks that bothered her as much as it may have been how to keep it
safe. It was all that she had from her years of a disastrous marriage.
Maria was more adept at sensing that it was soon be worthless, for she
saw no hope in escaping the poverty that lay ahead.[^30] J.B. could not
seriously have believed that the 4,000 Marks were sufficient to last her
the rest of her life. By his own calculations that amounted to only
$181.00 in American dollars at that time. On the other hand, J.B. could
not help but brag about the money he made, yet he failed to mention his
oil speculation. Nor was he deriving the satisfactory earnings from his
law practice he alluded to in the two or three years of practice in
Fredericksburg. Finally, it was also a surprise to learn that he had
been in contact with Vincent's sons and that an offer of employment had
been discussed. Remarkably, J.B. was also hinting at returning to
Hamilton now that he was free from government restrictions to do so and
if his excursion to Cuba went well. He was only six or seven months into
his new venture of securing oil leases, which despite all the hype
evident in the press, might have indicated the uncertainty of finding
the quick riches always promised by such booms.

For much of the war, J.B. had no clue as to the fate of his family and
of what effect the war was having on them. Living conditions in Germany
finally declined dramatically toward the end of the war, for the Allied
blockade began to make life quite difficult.

[^31] J.B. would later often remark that upon his return to Europe in the fall of 1921 that it was not the same Germany that he had remembered from his youth and that he would never return again. It was true. Change had come to Germany just as it had to all the countries that had allowed themselves to become involved in this war. Except for the United States, a generation of each combatant's youths lay dead in countless military cemeteries across the remnants of battlefields, especially in France and Germany. Just as Americans finally succumbed to years of a media bias that championed solutions offering a socialist ideology against sending its youths into a war in Southeast Asia, so was spread first by word of mouth, then by manifestations, the protest against the continued senseless slaughter of Germany's youth by an arrogant German military-industrial complex. Those
wishing to advance radical philosophies now had the opportunity to use
the war to appeal to Germany's population for revolution. Ernst, freshly
called to service by the Kaiser, identified and sympathized with those
who were calling for an end to the horrors that four years of trench
warfare had brought and a war that seemed to have lost all purpose to
all but the naïve Americans.

Already such a movement had taken Russia out of the war the year before
the Armistice. If unchecked, it was now only a manner of months before
Germany crumbled from an internal unrest. The German government wished
to halt the war and act quickly to regain control of its populous. It
had been hoped that an Armistice would end the blockade and allow the
resumption of trade which was desired for badly needed food and
supplies. Even the German military had now seen that this had become a
war against a people, not against armies, and it had been badly prepared
to wage such a war. As the unrest grew within Germany, the Allies looked
to an Armistice as their key to a German surrender and consequently
refused now to consider an Armistice until their positions was
strengthened. Consequently, the blockade was kept in place. Time was on
their side for Britain and France realized that what they could not win
on the battlefield, they could now win by starving a population into
submission and destroying a nation's faith in its government. With time,
a rising tide of protest would accomplish victory for the Allies from
within Germany itself.

To begin to pacify a growing anger among its people, the 1871 German
constitution was finally amended in late October of 1918 to make the
Reich a parliamentary democracy, but the government had waited too long.
The then-current plan to transform Germany into a constitutional
monarchy similar to Britain quickly became obsolete as the country slid
into a state of near-total chaos. Germany was flooded with soldiers
returning from the front. Violence across the Reich was growing rampant,
and rebellions had already broken out in some cities. By the end of the
month, the crews of two navy ships mutinied. The military arrested about
1,000 seamen, but the local revolts, fanned by socialists, turned into a
general rebellion that quickly swept over most of Germany.[^32] How was
Germany to continue fighting with troops at home mutinying? In the late
months of 1918, word of an end to fighting became a reality. An Armistice, one that would leave all armies in place, was
about to be agreed to by all sides. But, as the populous in Germany took
to the streets in celebrations, they called for a slew of new reforms in
governing. These were led by the many idealists, who, by their actions,
gave the Allies an opportunity to turn the Armistice into a German
surrender. A growing number of Germans now demanded change along a
socialist model.[^33] The allies, sensing victory, refused to negotiate for
any kind of an end to the fighting as long as Kaiser Wilhelm II was
still on the throne.[^34]\
In the first week of November, a new parliament, flush with new members,
demanded that the Kaiser abdicate.[^35]Two days later, Wilhelm II agreed,
choosing to live in exile in the Netherlands.[^36]On the same day, a new
Republic was proclaimed, but another group proclaimed a new Socialist
Republic in Berlin. Who now spoke for Germany? Across Germany, seamen,
soldiers, and workers solidarized with those that had been arrested
elsewhere and began electing workers and soldiers' councils modeled
after the soviets of the 1917 Russian Revolution. In early November,
revolutions had reached Munich.[^37] The situation throughout Germany was
growing more chaotic by the day. Finally, German generals and a few
leaders agreed that Germany should create a new democratic government.[^38]
Prince Max von Baden, the last of any royalty, transferred his powers to
the first "President" of the Weimar Republic.[^39] It was quickly apparent,
however, that this did not satisfy many, so a day later, a \"Council of
People\'s Deputies\" managed to enforce quick elections for a National
Assembly to produce a constitution for a parliamentary system,
marginalizing movements that called for a Socialist Republic.[^40] No one
seemed happy, and many Germans were bewildered at the changes being
fanned throughout Germany from all sides. What had happened to their
country? Seeing that Germany was now thoroughly weakened internally, the
Allies agreed to an Armistice on November 11, 1918, and the fighting
portion of the war came to an end.[^41] Like a chess game, the Allies were
about to checkmate Germany. Americans foolishly celebrated, but the
foundations for a future war had been sown. The United States began to
bring her troops home.

Many Germans, Ernst among them, were stunned, especially as Germany's
future was uncertain. Troops had put down another Berlin soldiers'
mutiny about a week after the Armistice, and in another month, the
German Communist Party was formed as 1918 drew to a close.[^42] No one knew
what the Armistice would bring for the New Year. In January 1919,
Germany\'s new delegation at Versailles was confronted with the
conditions of the Armistice. Acceptance of a Treaty of Versailles was
demanded. The Allies were acting as if Germany had surrendered! The
demands now upon Germany included that she had to cede all her colonies
around the world.[^43] Germany was to hand over its entire navy and to
reduce its army.[^44] Additionally, Germany was to pay reparations for all
the damage caused in France and Belgium and was to accept sole
responsibility for the war.[^45] Germany could not mount much objection,
for it was weakened to a point that it could not resume the fighting. It
became quite clear that the Allies, led by the British and the French,
were using the blockade to force the new German government into
accepting its demands with no compromise. Whether millions of Germans
starved in the process was of no concern to the Allies, but the actions
horrified some Americans.[^46] Conditions grew far worse across Germany and
the fate of German-American's families, including J.B.'s family,
remained unknown for another six months of 1919.

The former Central Powers were punished severely by the war\'s
concluding treaties.[^47] Germany lost 15 percent of its prewar capacity,
all of its foreign investments, and 90 percent of its mercantile
fleet.[^48]Even ocean-going ships, such as the German SS *Brandenburg*, the
ship that had taken J.B. to Texas, was handed over permanently to
private British business interests. The Treaty of Versailles imposed
reparations payments, which were generally considered intolerable and
impossible by Germans.[^49] The conditions the self-declared victors
demanded were now considered non-negotiable, and since Germany was in
desperate need of the lifting of the extreme blockade, the
representatives of the government finally signed the treaty for Germany
in late June.[^50] The new government accepted the heavy reductions of the
German military and heavy reparations payments.[^51] Fifty years after its
founding, the German Republic lay in complete submission before the
powers it had bested in industrial competition since its inception.
About a month after Joseph's wrote his first letter home, the young
republic\'s president signed the new German constitution into law.[^52] The
widespread material destruction totaled billions of dollars of damage in
Europe. Agricultural production had been severely reduced during the war
in all of the combative nations, which had been a bonanza for American
farmers. Peace also had its consequences as J.B.'s relatives in Hamilton
were soon to discover. Until production returned to its prewar levels,
starvation remained a persistent problem until the effects of the
blockade finally diminished.[^53] Prospects for American agriculture to
continue its boom looked optimistic at the moment, but as many were to
discover, peace also had its disadvantages. Germans continued to starve
for months following the end of fighting, but J.B. never inquired if his
mother and family had enough to eat. However, he indicated that he would
send some groceries when he returned from Cuba.

Meanwhile, the European Allies had their own financial problems. Britain
and France ended the war deeply indebted to the United States, which
demanded repayment in gold. Germany was no exception to this rule as
most of the money being repaid by Germany to Britain and France was
borrowed money as well.[^54] Ironically, J.B. was absolutely correct in his
assessment that the United States should take over events in Europe. An
astute observer of events, he saw what few others even bothered to
consider: the consequences unfolding at the end of the war. He clearly
saw that Britain and France were finished as world leaders and that it
was the United States that should have stepped in and made the peace.
Sadly, the United States withdrew its influence and allowed the seeds of
a future war to be sown. Ironically, as anxious as Americans had been
about the war, about killing the Kaiser, about wiping anything German
from their own history, they now withdrew and returned to their prewar
attitudes as if world events were none of their worry. Ready to assist
in humanitarian aid, the United States found itself stymied by her
French and British allies and was unable to end for half a year the
blockade that was kept in place by the British. Until such time it was
lifted by the British, relatives in the United States had to wait for
news of their loved ones as the starvation went on unchecked. Germans
had to exist on whatever they had. There was no commerce and no trade,
for nothing could be shipped in or out of Germany, not even news. And,
J.B. became more convinced than ever that immigration from Germany was
the best for his family. Until he received some word from Germany, he
had no choice but to continue to survive on this side of the Atlantic
and hope for some word from his family.

Trying to survive in a new postwar America was another experience. Much
of the war rhetoric was fading quickly. If oil had become a new interest
to which J.B. turned his attention, he was not so far distant from his
relatives in Hamilton that he had severed all ties. Despite his marginal
successes in beginning to buy and sell oil leases, J.B. decided to
accept an offer extended to him about June or July 1919 from his cousins
in Hamilton and return to work at J. F. Wieser & Co. as their
international sales representative. They obviously thought that J.B., as
an European, might now have some value to them after all. The sad part
of their offer was that for the year during which he could not legally
work, they had done nothing. Certainly, J.B. had to have some
reservation in accepting. His last position with them had been as a
bookkeeper, but he had also studied law at that time, and once he had
been admitted to the Texas Bar, he had opened his own office in
Hamilton. His determination to apply himself and succeed had to have
been impressive even to them. Now his cousins looked to him as useful,
perhaps in expanding the export of their flour and wheat. After all, he
had boasted of speaking Spanish fluently and now was a lawyer, which
should give him an understanding of contracts, and perhaps he could even
offer some legal advice to them from time to time. The only minor
technicality preventing his travel overseas had also been lifted with
the end of the war. He now was able to obtain a U.S. passport. His first
assignment was going to be Cuba.[^55] That J. F. Wieser & Co. had decided
to venture into exporting was not really a startling or an unexpected
revelation to J.B., as Vincent and his sons had had a history of
branching out into other ventures since moving to Texas. Impressively,
they had assembled an empire of sorts that included considerable shares
in railroads, power companies, steam, roller mills, grain elevators,
water systems, telephone companies, and banks.[^56]

Sugar was, of course, Cuba's chief crop for export and was controlled
mostly by American interests. Cuba could not, however, grow maize or
produce flour. This was a perfect opening for J. F. Wieser & Co., under
normal circumstances, for these were two crops readily available to
them, but as many Americans were soon to discover, commodities had been
severely affected by war just as had about everything else. Wars had
consequences for both the winners and losers and often produced
unforeseen change on both sides. The war years had been a bonanza to
American farmers, and its demand raised the price of wheat to new
heights and caused a massive increase in production. Peace in Europe,
however, meant that farmers overseas regained their niche in wheat
production among other crops, and the price for wheat fell. The American
farmer was once again the big loser as American wheat fell to new
lows.[^57] Normally this would have meant that farmers would find other
crops, to grow, and millers like J. F. Wieser & Co. could pay farmers
less. But the fact that farmers were not making expenses and losing
their family farms played perfectly into the hands of the progressives.
Almost eight years of a progressive administration in the White House
now saw an opportunity to interfere in the free market system, save
farmers from certain financial ruin, and win their support for more
governmental intrusion into the business of America. President Wilson
took over all wheat production and named a "Wheat Director" who set the
price of a bushel of wheat at $2.26. The United States government
controlled the national market in buying and selling wheat. Even the
export of wheat required any company desiring to export obtain a
government license. J. F. Wieser & Co., consequently, complied and was
issued the License No. 002897 FHMY but was prevented from offering wheat
and flour at prices not approved by the director.[^58] It placed J. F.
Wieser & Co., and any company for that matter, at a distinct
disadvantage in offering to sell on the international market because
their competitors knew what the American price was and could beat them
at every market Americans tried to enter. It proved to be a huge
windfall for other nations' growers and despite all the good intensions
of the progressives, the measure proved to become another socialist
failure. The mission and those that followed were doomed before they
began, but J. F. Wieser & Co. decided, nevertheless, to proceed with an
attempt to sell its flour in Cuba in late 1919, and J.B. was to be their
man.

How J.B. reacted to returning to work for his cousins was not reflected
in any letters that survived during his Cuban mission. Perhaps he had
long buried the hatchet with them and had resolved matters to be in the
past. The only clear conclusion was that for the next two years he was
willing and able to leave Fredericksburg and accept assignments from
them. It was a promise of a monthly stipend and perhaps a future of
earning a commission on sales that caused him to abandon his efforts at
securing oil leases and accept their offer. Whatever may have been his
reasoning, he apparently had not yet committed to remaining in
Fredericksburg despite supposedly having developed a close relationship
with the daughter of the owner of his boardinghouse.

J.B. had gotten to know Estella rather well, at least to a point that on
his first extended trip away from her, he thought of writing to "his
girl." (Estella would keep all of his letters tied in a bundle in her
Lane cedar chest for decades.)[^59] J.B. had been taking a room at Lena
Zimmermann's on West San Antonio for nearly two years. Estella, the shy,
second oldest daughter of Lena Zimmermann, had answered his knocking at
the front door of her mother's boardinghouse that late August evening in 1917.    She had blossomed into a young woman of eighteen by 1919. When either one exactly caught the other's eye can now never be known.
Whether it was he, when on that first night he, as a stranger, asked to
try her mother's cooking, or whether it was she, after months of
watching that distinguished-looking German stranger begin to attempt his
assimilation into Fredericksburg's society, will just forever remain a
mystery, but their relationship had blossomed to something other than a
mere acquaintance. At some point the two had grown close enough for J.B. to ask her to take
care of things in his absence. How, of course, was anyone's guess?
Perhaps he had noticed that she had a head for numbers. Perhaps she was
resourceful and more considerate toward him than her older sister. Or,
perhaps she had offered consolations as he might have lamented on days
that had not gone well. Perhaps he just noticed that she, like his
mother, was a hard worker who never complained but did all the things
that were expected of her in helping her mother.[^60] The fourth oldest of
eight other siblings, she had known nothing but work all her life. At
the early age of six, Estella had been sent into the cotton fields by
her still unmarried mother. She spent long days in late September and
early October picking cotton while she wished she could have been in
school as other children were.[^61] Work in the cotton fields interrupted
the beginning of each school year until eventually she had to quit
altogether. Though the pay was miniscule, every penny was needed by her
mother for food and supplies just to enable her mother to provide meals,
not only for her children, but also more importantly, for her paying
guests. All of Lena's children helped with work in the boarding house,
but it was all too clear to see that Lena was never really getting
ahead. Each of her older boys had run away still in their teens, leaving
only Louise, the oldest of Lena's children, Estella, and a younger
brother old enough to help her.[^62]

As everywhere else in America, the war reached deep into the Texas Hill
Country as well and affected people and businesses. Additional changes
followed. Prohibition, for one, brought an end to Lone Star Brewery's
business, and their warehouse near the depot was quickly leased or sold
to Collin's Wholesale Grocery Supply. Because she was skilled with
numbers, Estella found work there as a bookkeeper, eventually earning as
much as $7.00 a week. What money was not needed by her mother, she
managed to put away money in her hope chest. After all, Estella had
developed into a young woman by 1919 and, like all girls, was thinking
of finally getting out on her own. She began to think of her future and
putting as much of what she earned away for herself. [^63] Louise, on the
other hand had apparently resigned herself to staying with their mother
indefinitely, but secretly she was growing daily more despondent.

How much time J.B. spent hanging around Lena's boardinghouse cannot be
determined. Certainly, there were many afternoons and evenings spent
playing cards. Lena's place was always full of people coming and going,
whether it was neighborhood friends dropping in for a mid-morning or
mid-afternoon *Kaffeeklatsch* or those taking meals, there were plenty
of folks for J.B. to corral into a game while Lena and her girls
cleaned, cooked, and straightened the place. In either case, J.B. and
Estella did not remain strangers, and she may at times have joined in to
play a game of cards or dominoes. Understanding numbers made her a sharp
card player, something that J.B. respected. By 1919 there may even have
been a hint of romance in the air. And, as he now began to travel, he
kept her in mind as he departed for his first extensive selling trip to
the Republic of Cuba. How exciting it must have been to receive a card
or letter from someone travelling across or better yet, outside the
United States?[^64]

J.B. was no spendthrift himself, although it is often difficult to
understand the boasting that he wrote of in his letters. He had found
that earning money was difficult as an attorney, for the war had not
only compounded his situation, and as an alien, it prevented him in
pursuing work. Saving money had been even more difficult in Texas
because whatever extra cash he earned, he used to further his education.
How much his Uncle Vincent actually contributed can at best be only
speculated. Once, however, while still in Hamilton, he had even managed
to save enough money to purchase 40 acres in far away Brewster County,[^65]
but real estate investments were long-term projects, and it might be
years before he could recover his investment or even make a profit. And,
the Unites States' entry into the war had curtailed his ability to work,
which meant that he had to subsist on what little savings he had or on
the generosity of others. That decree nullified a full year of studying
under his friend's father, Hervey Chesley Sr., his receiving a degree in
law, and his being admitted to the Texas Bar. It was not fair, of
course, but what could he do? He could not even legally leave town. Even
trying to assimilate among the Germans in Fredericksburg could not offer
complete protection. Others knew of him, and he had paid the price for
his carelessness. Soon, however, his five years would be up and the
citizenship, for which he had filed in 1915, would at last give him his
freedom to legally work and travel legally.

J.B. had known as early as July of 1919 that he would be travelling to
Cuba. He had much time to prepare, including obtaining his passport,
which he finally received October 20, but the days and weeks up to his
departure were filled with his oil speculating. On Monday, November 3,
1919, he left Fredericksburg by train to San Antonio for connections
north to Hico, there to receive his two-day briefing from his cousins
preparing him for his mission. What was remarkable about this first
letter was the compelling need to write to Estella on his very first day
away from her. Does he already suspect that she misses him? Note also
the instructions, apparently forgotten upon leaving, for her to collect
a payment for him.

<center>

![jf weiser and co ](/assets/images/chapters/7/jf.jpg)

</center>

<blockquote>

HICO, TEXAS
November 4, 1919

My Dear Girl,

I made Hico, Texas, by Monday noon and just awakened from a good
night's rest. I was immensely tired out from the long trip and feel like
I need a year's sleep.* *I will be here a few days and then start on the
Havana trip. I should be in Cuba by the later part of next week, barring
accidents. It is fairly chilly up here at nights - almost more than in
Gillespie County. The weather otherwise is fair. The entire countryside
is having signs of an early fall everywhere.

I trust that you have, by this time, overcome you stair mishap and
that you do not have the blues.

I will write upon arrival in Cuba or send you just a postcard.

Without more for today, I remain
Yours as ever,
J. B. Wieser
PS
You might go down to Dr. Treadwater's office and collect the $4.50 for
the bench I left there. Do not sell it at $4.00.



</blockquote>

J.B. traveled north to Fort Worth from Hico to catch a train east to New
Orleans. He has decided not to wait until reaching Havana to write
Estella and posts this penny postcard from Ft. Worth.

<center>

![](/assets/images/chapters/7/postcard.jpg)

**J.B.'s Postcard mailed from Fort Worth, Texas**

</center>


<blockquote>

Ft. Worth 6/11.19
On way to New Orleans
Heading Ft. Worth 6:15 tonight
Address any important Communication

JB Wieser

Agency -- Havana, Cuba

JBWieser

</blockquote>

Four days after posting the first postcard to Estella, J.B. already
found himself stuck somewhere around Theodore, Alabama. It was his first
trip into another state, and he noted the changes. The Civil War had
prevented these states from developing as fast as many of the northern
states, but he would have been oblivious to that. Nevertheless, J.B.
found these states less progressive than Texas and noted that the
weather and a derailment began to affect his travel plans. Apparently he
did have a schedule to meet if he intended to arrive in Havana on or
before a certain date. He also noted that he was expecting to hear from
Estella in Cuba.

<center>

![Envelope mailed aboard the train and cancelled by the](/assets/images/chapters/7/postcardest.jpg)

<em>Envelope mailed aboard the train and cancelled by the Trans.Clk.RRy Clerk Railroad </em> [^66]

</center>

<blockquote>

WESTERN UNION
TELEGRAM

Theodore, Alabama, November 8, 1919

TO: Dear little Girl.

We just had the first railroad wreck since leaving Fredericksburg. We
will be laid up about half a day or there about. There is a quite a
change in the scenery - instead of Gardens - fanned grasses growing just
as thick, and water and swamps can be found everywhere. Sometimes the
telephone poles have their wires sticking only about a foot above the
water. It was pretty warm near New Orleans and is raining now. At this
rate, I shall miss my connections to Key West.[^67] I am planning to take
the rails to there and then board a ship to Cuba.

I trust you are feeling well and have gotten over the blues. I am
expecting to hear from you soon. I remain.

From
J. B. Wieser
PS Address Letters.

J. B. Wieser

% Davis Mercantile Agency

Havana

</blockquote>

The next day found him in Jacksonville, Florida. There he had time to
buy a packet of picture postcards while changing trains for his final
leg to Key West. These, too, were mailed while on his way to Key West.
"His girl" was never far from his mind. Public passenger services
between Havana, Cuba, and Key West, Florida had only been initiated in
January 1912 and only a year before Fredericksburg itself was connected
by rail. A New York to Key West limited-stop express connected with a
Havana steamer. The northbound trip was timed to leave Havana at 10:30
daily in the mornings, docking at Key West by 6:30 that afternoon and
covering the 90 mile trip in about 8 hours, a point that J.B. kept in
mind for his return. Allowing an hour to transfer, the northbound train
began at 7:30 p.m. and arrived at Jacksonville, Florida on the far
northern Atlantic side of the state at 1:55 p.m. the next day. From
there it returned to points north. Travel to Cuba was now faster than
ever.[^68] It was this southbound express J.B was trying to catch to Key
West.Key West, itself, lay only 129 miles south of Miami, Florida and
only 106 miles north-northeast of Havana. Cuba, at its closest point,
was just another 94 statute miles south of the United States.[^69]The
Havana Special apparently usually took more than seven hours, as Joseph
soon discovered, for his efforts at attempting to keep some sort of
schedule began to be useless. Speeds on the Extension line were slow,
with trains rarely exceeding 35 to 45 mph on the Keys themselves and
limited to 15 mph on the numerous and seemingly endless series of
bridges.[^70] J.B.'s earlier delay at a derailment was now of little
consequence as just getting there became his top priority, not the
haste. J.B. was being introduced to the pace of the "Old South."\
Only passenger steamers served the Key West pier, but the line did carry
freight. A train-ferry berth had been constructed some years back, and
three freight-only ferries were in service.[^71] The thought of sending
flour on this line to Cuba was certainly in his thoughts as he observed
everything along the way for shipping loaded cars. Finally arriving at
Key West, he could look out to the strait that separated the United
States and Cuba. Just five years earlier he had passed through the
straight on his way to Galveston. Traveling aboard trains and ferries
had to bring back memories of Lake Constance where steamers by the
dozens serviced the various cities surrounding the lake, and traveling
aboard a steamer was no more unusual at that time than traveling by
automobile. But J.B. had little time to reminisce about Germany. All
about him lay debris and destruction, and he soon realized that he was
fortunate to have been able to travel down to Key West at all at this
time of year.[^72]

Key West, Florida, had been hit by the most powerful hurricane in its
history in September of 1919, only two months before J.B. arrived there
on his way to Havana. The storm killed more than 800 people before it
was over. More than 500 of these were lost on ten ships that either sank
or were reported missing; among these was one that was of the type J.B.
was now trying to catch. The storm did severe damage to the Key
West-Havana docks and buildings in Key West.73 Some places in the Keys
were deluged with over a foot of rain. The maximum sustained winds were
reported to have exceeded 110 mph.74 The destruction remaining from the
storm was enormous, yet J.B. did not mention the damages, nor did the
destruction hinder rail traffic, as J.B. made exceptionally good time
and arrived at Key West on the 10th. He immediately booked passage
aboard a ferry which could have covered the distance between Key West
and Havana in just eight hours.75 By the 11th, just a few days short of
his 31st birthday, he was booked into his hotel in Havana. Another year
had gone by, and he was still undecided about the direction of his life.
Now, strangely, he found himself back in the employment of those who had
caused him so much pain for most of that time.

160

> **POST FOLDER**\
> Jacksonville

Jacksonville, Florida

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image6.png){width="2.0652777777777778in" height="1.3444444444444446in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image7.png){width="2.0861111111111112in" height="1.3430544619422573in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image8.png){width="2.1055555555555556in" height="1.3222211286089238in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image9.png){width="1.9597222222222221in" height="1.4999989063867016in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image10.png){width="2.1055555555555556in" height="1.4680544619422573in"}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image11.png){width="2.084722222222222in" height="1.4666655730533684in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image12.png){width="1.4999989063867016in" height="2.084722222222222in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image13.png){width="1.448611111111111in" height="2.084722222222222in"}
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image14.png){width="1.5722211286089238in" height="2.084722222222222in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image15.png){width="1.3638877952755906in" height="2.084722222222222in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image16.png){width="2.125in" height="1.5708333333333333in"}
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image17.png){width="2.0208333333333335in" height="1.5513877952755906in"}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image18.png){width="1.9597222222222221in" height="1.5319433508311462in"}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> **Picture postcard folder J.B. brought back from Florida in 1919**

161

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image19.png){width="2.918054461942257in" height="4.425in"}
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

J. F. Wieser & Co.'s "Our Baker" Brand

> 76

The following letter indicates that he may have arrived early on the
11th, which might have meant he traveled the distance between Key West
and Havana overnight. A startling realization was the extreme humidity
he now experienced and the high prices, which are something that he
would forever comment upon wherever he traveled. He has already
encountered difficulty with his Spanish and realized that the spoken
word was not always what was learned by book. A rather cute reference is
noted as to whether Estella had found another boyfriend and a second
that he would not be looking around. The references to dominoes and
rough games give some insight into how he may have spent his past times
in Fredericksburg. It does appear that he set out to work, for he wrote
no more letters until he received a letter from Estella on the 22nd.

J.F. Wieser & Co., Inc.

OWNERS

HICO ROLLER MILLS

MANUFACTURERS OF

HIGH GRADE FLOUR

DEALERS IN GRAIN AND FEED STUFF

HICO, TEXAS

United States Wheat Director

*Havana, Cuba, Brooklyn Hotel*

*November 11, 1919*\
*Dear Estella,*\
*I have just arrived in Havana and find the weather pretty warm; reckon
I will have to buy me a new suit suitable to local conditions. Havana
is*

*quite a nice old town having about 250,000 inhabitants. There is quite
a crowd of Americans here since the winter season is on. The cost of
living here is high. Rooms without meal are two and one half dollars per
day. Meals can cost from a dollar fifty to two dollars. Wearing apparel
seems about same price as in the U. S. Shoes costs from six to twelve
and suits*\
*from thirty to seventy.*

*I drank a bottle of old Spanish wine today in order to celebrate my
arrival and damn it if I did not feel it. I fell asleep from eleven
o'clock in the morning until three o'clock in the afternoon. I am just
now up and writing letters. My expenses are over a hundred dollars so
far. Well, why should I worry? I will have to get busy though and intend
to start tomorrow. My Spanish leads me to all kinds of collisions. I
will have to get down and study some.*

162

*I lost too much time playing dominoes in the old U. S.*

*How are you managing things there? Are you feeling well? Have you
gotten another beau? I will not have time for sweet entertainment here.
I have to study in my spare time. How are things in general? Have there
been any rowdy games? Or are you still in a fighting mood?*\
*Write me at Hotel Brooklyn, Havana, Cuba.*

> *J. B. Wieser*

It is too bad that Stella would later destroy many of J.B.'s letters
that she kept in her cedar chest. They might explain the rowdy games he
refers to here and perhaps more about her fighting mood. More
interesting was what he mentioned in the following letter with
references to having sought employment for her at H. H. Sagebiel,
another Fredericksburg lawyer, and his suggestion that she study law.77
After complaining about the kind of work that attorneys have to contend
with, he suggested that she take up that profession. If nothing else, it
spoke well of his opinion of her mind and her potential capabilities.
What a team she and J.B. might have made!

*Havana, Cuba, Brooklyn Hotel*

*November 22, 1919*

*My dear Girl:*\
*Received your letter of the 12th inst. and have been very pleased to
hear from you. It seems it takes just about a week to get
communications.*

*I do not like matters here very much* \[and\] *am disappointed in the
whole situation. Thought so much of Cuba, and find there is nothing
unusual about it* \[at\]*all. Almost wish myself back to Fredericksburg.
I shall not stay any longer than necessary. My Spanish is not what it
should be and find it necessary to take some lessons; will start Monday
night, having two girls to exchange English for Spanish. Although I can
read the stuff fairly well,*\[but\] *fail to understand properly. It
seems my ear is not accustomed to the language.*

*Note what you say in regard to Threadwell\'s intention, guess the
matter will be all right.78 If he*\
*moves finally to Fr' burg, take the bench home. Do you receive my
newspapers;*\[?\] *if not, get them*.\[sic\] *I do not receive any and
it is useless to have same lying at the post office. Are you studying
law? You ought to. It is worthwhile. Has Sagebiel never indicated
employment for you? I talked to him before I left.*

*If you write, address "Hotel Brocklyn"* \[sic\]*Habana, Cuba. So I will
receive the letters here,* \[for I\] *will be in Havana at least another
14 days I recon. Did you notice any advertisements regarding the
Gillespie County Oil situation; if you do, please send me the
clippings.*

*Yours, Bob*

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](vertopal_07c61652a2b048648565137c7f465b3b/media/image20.png){width="4.0in" height="2.551388888888889in"}
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Postcard packet purchased by J.B. in Cuba**

> 79

After weeks in Cuba, J.B. has been calling on potential customers
without any success but has seen some of the country. His Spanish in
which he had been claiming to be so fluent had caused him considerable
difficulties. One wonders what Estella thought of him taking lessons
from two women? He also took time to explore a city close by but quickly
discovered that daily life in tropical climates was intolerable for him,
especially when one was wearing less than ideal clothing. He needed
something that was more suitable to wear and use in Cuba, for there was
no doubt that he had arrived in Cuba with nothing for the climate there.
At best, he still had many woolen items better suited for the colder
regions of Germany and North Central Texas. Despite his lack of money,
he was prone to being a dapper dresser. Now that he was back being a
salesman, he needed to look his best.

163

> *Havana, Cuba, Brooklyn Hotel*\
> *December 1, 1919*

*Dear Estella,*\
*I have just returned from a trip to Matanzas* 80 *and find your letters
of November 18 and 20 instant, and am glad to hear of you. Sorry you are
not feeling well and should like to know the cause! Trusting you are ok
by receipt of this letter.* 81\
*It is pretty hot here; had to buy a Paten Beal suit* 82 *and am wearing
a straw hat - cannot use my old clothes at all -- Well, I did figure it
this way, and I really did need a summer suit. Business is nil - I do
not know but that I might be home again pretty soon; am tired of Cuba
and would rather go hunting right now.*

*Tell Joseph* (Henry Joseph)*83 I really should like to be with him, and
he may kill the thirteen-pointer I have a right to kill. He may save me
a head this year because he did not let me have any last year. This
provided the deer do have horns.*

*Do not know how long I will be in Havana this time - write Hotel
Brooklyn, for I will stay there every time while in town. Thanks for the
article advertisement - wish you would send me others.*

> *Best wishes to all. I remain yours,*\
> *Bob*

J.B. was not going to permit his trip to Cuba go unnoticed by his family
in Germany. It was his way of indicating that he was on his way to
becoming successful. It was one of the few achievements that he had been
able to demonstrate. He obviously had alerted them to write him there.
He very likely hoped that his sister would tell his mother to write him
there and she did. The trip to Cuba was planned for some time and
perhaps even where he would stay. Certainly he had contacts in Cuba with
whom appointments had been arranged by the J. F. Wieser & Co. His
expenses were covered, as were his clothes, or he would not have bought
a new suit. The Hotel Brooklyn was one of the better hotels in Havana
and centrally located. It was known for its "American connections."\
The letter he received from his mother was not bringing the kind of news
that he was expecting. Maria's depression was clearly evident, and she
presented a side of their circumstances that he had chosen largely to
ignore. Perhaps Maria was somewhat delusional as J.B.'s reference to
taking care of cows make no sense whatsoever. Maria was living with Anna
and Ernst in Tuttlingen. They had no cows! Nor was she working or
supporting her children. It appears that she was trying to lay guilt on
her favorite son for not having helped all these years.

**JOSE SANTANA** **CABLE ADD.: BROOKLYN, HAVANA** **CODE; WESTERN
UNION**

> **H O T E L B R O O K L Y N**\
> P R A D O 97, H A V A N A, C U B A\
> T E L E F O N O A - 1 5 3 6\
> Habana, Cuba

*December 12, 1919*\
*Dear Mother,*\
*I have just received your letter from October 22. It is the first time
I have received one in a year. It really made me feel good to hear from
you once again. I would never have thought that you would find yourself
in need and that you would have no way to rescue yourself. I could
possibly return and with what we all have saved, we could probably have
an easier life. However, it surprises me that things are not as they
should be. My situation here is tolerable and when the war is finally
over, and by that, I mean when the United States comes to its senses and
takes over the situation in Europe, things will get better.*

*Are Anna and Ernst not earning enough to take care of your problems? In
any case, my dear mother, you should not have to endure any problems.
Just as soon as I am back on my feet, I will help you. During the war, I
had difficult times as well. Since then, however, things are getting
better. During the war, I was not allowed to work, and all that I had
saved was spent to stay alive. Things should turn around for you soon.*

*How is your health? Can't you stay home and take care of the cows? My
dear mother, you write that you have to work in order to help Anna and
Ernst. Can't they take care of themselves? It would be a shame if you
were to find yourself in ill health because of this. I can understand
that a mother wants to help her children, but to do so you should not
have to starve. You write that you have some money in savings. For whom
are you saving it? While it is good to put something aside, one should
not have to starve just to do it. Please use the money and buy enough to
eat. You do not have to save it for us. When it is all gone, let me
know.*

*When I return to the United States, I will see whether I can send a
package of groceries to you. I have always thought that one could buy
such things there as well as here, but I suppose that the war has made
it difficult to acquire some things. My dear mother, if only you were
younger! I would not hesitate to tell all three of you to leave Germany.
It simply is such a difficult undertaking at an advanced age that I
think that it would be very hard on you to venture out into a strange
country. I can tell you it is hard, and I feel it again even now when I
am here in Cuba. The only good thing is that I can return to the States
in an instant. I will close for now, hoping that you will find yourself
in much better health, as you did two years ago. Take care and see to it
that no harm comes to you.*

> *Please write again soon, but to Fredericksburg, Texas. Give my
> greetings to everyone.*

164

*Joseph Benedict*\
*P.S.* *Please understand that what I have said regarding age is true,
despite being said by someone much younger.*

*PPS.* *By the way! One can buy land in Mexico now beginning at only
$5.00. If anyone there wants more information, tell them to write me.*

It is obvious that his mother was asking for help. She was angry and she
had not written to him in over a year. There was a sense of
estrangement. J.B. had sent no packages or helped her since the end of
the war and almost seemed indifferent at times to her struggle. He
seemed appalled that she, as a mother, thinks of helping her children or
rather was angry that Anna and Ernst were not doing more to make her
life easier, however, he declined sending money and offered only to send
groceries when he returned to Texas and perhaps money only when he was
on his feet.84 Perhaps he had not yet come to really understand that his
mother was no longer living on a farm and had not since Anna brought her
to Tuttlingen some six years ago. There were simply no cows to help with
in Tuttlingen. In either event it was not the kind of letter he had been
expected to receive. Nor were any more letters received from Estella.

As 1919 came to a close, it is doubtful that J.B. contracted any sale of
flour to the Cubans. The mission was doomed from the beginning, and
until the United States ended its interference in the private sector,
international trade for flour continued to suffer. That those at J. F.
Wieser & Co. did not see that nor that J.B. did not speak of it will
also remain a mystery, for the failure to sell Cuba flour or grain did
not appear to damper their enthusiasm to keep trying. Perhaps that is
the salesmanship in that. International trade does not happen overnight.
J.B. returned to Fredericksburg in late December, retracing the route by
rail westward to a more comfortable environment to which he had already
grown accustomed. He returned to his oil speculation with a greater
enthusiasm that before. But now he had shown himself to be one step
ahead of all others. He was no longer just an immigrant. He was now a
world traveler. And, he returned to Estella for now and brought her from
Cuba a thin golden necklace from which dangled a tiny pearl surrounded
by a golden ring. The second decade of the century came to a close with
J.B., now at 31, still single and still hoping to reap some of America's
golden promises. He returned to his search for his black gold.


[^1]: *The Fredericksburg Standard*: Saturday, September 16, 1917

[^2]:**Skat** and **high low jack and game** were two popular games at this
time. Skat is a German card game that German-Americans played with
intensity and ferociousness. It was extremely popular in Fredericksburg,
but today appears to be played by only an extreme few. High low jack &
game is a simple card game involving some skill but remained popular
with J.B. Card games would remain a part of J.B. for the rest of his
life. Later, Estella would comment that often she had to play cards to
calm him after a particularly stressful day in court.

[^3]: W.D. Hornaday Collection, Prints and Photographs Collection, Archives and Information Services Division, Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 1975/70-4119 and 1975/70-4120.
http://link.tsl.state.tx.us/exhibits/railroad/oil/spindletop.html -
accessed - December 30, 2010.

[^4]: For Texans, the 20th century began nine days later, on Jan. 10, when,
spurting drilling pipe, mud, gas and oil, the Lucas No. 1 well blew in
at Spindletop near Beaumont 1901. - Oil and Texas: A Cultural History by
Mary G. Ramos and first published in the 2000-2001 edition of the *Texas
Almanac*. http://www.texasalmanac.com/history/highlights/oil/ - accessed
December 29, 2010. This was more oil than had ever been seen anywhere in
the entire world. \"Lucas 1\", flowed at an initial rate of nearly
100,000 barrels per day, more than all of the other producing wells in
the United States combined! - The Oil Boom in Texas -- Eno Petroleum
Corporation - http://www.enopetroleum.com/texasoilboom.html - accessed
December 29, 2010.

[^5]: **Spindle Top** was the birth of the modern oil industry. Oil was
struck when drillers sunk a well into a giant underground dome known as
"Spindletop" on January 10, 1911. Indians had been aware of oil seeping
to the surface for centuries. The Spanish had noted tar balls washing up
along the Texas beaches as early as 1543, and they used them to
waterproof their boots, but nothing changed for the next 350 years. Then
after months of drilling, oil was finally reached at a depth of 1,020
feet. While workers were changing bits, mud started bubbling back up the
hold and seconds later all existing pipe was blown from the well. It
reached a height of 150 feet and flowed at an initial rate of 100,000
barrels per day. Spindletop produced more than $50 million dollars
worth of oil, but the boom it ignited change everything about Texas and
set off one of the most frenzy searched for wealth ever seen. The search
continued for decades and few could escape the opportunities to search
for oil in their neighborhoods. Oil fever even caught recent immigrants
like J.B. to dream of striking it rich. Many tried, but few, very few,
were lucky. Petroleum Education: History of Oil -
http://www.priweb.org/ed/pgws/history/spindletop/spindletop2.html -
accessed July 27, 2011.

[^6]: J.B. purchased 100 of these at a time for a cost of $2.00. -- see
J.B.'s DL Ledger entry dated March 22, 1919. -- DL Ledger in possession
of Mark B. Wieser.

[^7]: This ad was run in the *Fredericksburg Standard* by Guideon Oil
Company. There is no record of what happened to this oil company or if
it existed. How many residents mailed their dollar in to register is
also not know, but the ad seemed too ambitious to be taken seriously.

[^8]: Of those oil companies found in J.B.'s DL Ledger, only the Hurst Oil &
Refinery is in existence today. Of the others nothing of record has been
found. --source, J.B.'s DL Ledger in the possession of Mark B. Wieser.

[^9]: It is unknown whether the Gillespie County Oil Development Company
used the money generated from its sale of stock or if Colonel Petsch
invested his own money in securing money. He may have been funded by a
number of oil companies just as J.B. had been. The one thing that was
certain, however, was that Colonel Petsch believed himself to be much
smarter than J.B. and much more sophisticated. The incident leading to
J.B.'s arrest in 1918 and the fact that they both shared offices on the
same floor of the Gold Building clearly marked the beginning of a
lifelong animosity between the two. J.B. was not kowtowed into leaving
town and perhaps eventually took much pride in being his nemesis, but it was Petsch who gained more recognition, more publicity, and more notoriety in Fredericksburg. He also gained more wealth but did not earn
unquestionable integrity.

[^10]: Many clients would feel a personal loss upon J.B.'s death many years
later and verbally exclaimed they did not know what they were going to
do now that he was no long available to ask for advice.

[^11]: This was another of J.B.'s many after-dinner tales. The location of
the accident most likely happened in Hico, where Uncle Vincent lived. It
is no longer clear who owned the automobile or why J.B. was unable to
steer it across the bridge. Nor was it mentioned of what the
consequences were he faced.

[^12]: Over [^50]: service stations once were located along Fredericksburg's
Main Street from one end to the other as everyone seemed to get into the
act of opening one.

[^13]: Some contemporaries of J.B. still could recall J.B. driving his
Maxwell down West San Antonio Street to show off his new purchase and
barely avoiding wrecking it while making a U-turn. -- Related by Arthur
Stehling to Mark Wieser ca 1986.

[^14]: Oil and Gas Map of Texas -- 2005 -
http://www.google.com/imgres?imgurl=http://www.texasmapstore.com/ -
accessed December 29, 2010.

[^15]: The engine of the Maxwell still rests beneath the gigantic oaks
surrounding the bungalow he and Estella built out on their farm.

For many years (at least until 1986), the cowling lay in a pasture at
the far south end of the first 100 acres J.B. purchased on Goehmann
Lane.

[^16]: The amounts of payments are reflected in his DL Ledger beginning in 1919 and in the Oil and Gas Leases filed with the county clerks in the
various Texas counties. -- see J.B.'s DL Ledger entry dated March 22,
1.    -- DL Ledger in possession of Mark B.

Wieser.-

[^17]: In 1913 the 13th Amendment was added to the U.S. Constitution
ratifying an income tax to be collected on its citizens earning over a
certain amount. All was part of a progressive revolution initiated by
those seeking a more liberal interpretation of the Constitution or
circumventing it. J.B. would complain bitterly about it for years.

[^18]: Advertisement run March 15, 1919 in [The Fredericksburg
Standard]{.ul}.

[^19]: Oil and Texas: A Cultural History by Mary G. Ramos and first
published in the 2000-2001 edition of the Texas Almanac.
http://www.texasalmanac.com/history/highlights/oil/ - accessed December
29, 2010.

[^20]: Panhandle Petroleum, Edited by Bobby D. Weaver *-* Discovery of the
Panhandle Oil and Gas Field - by N. D. Bartlett -
http://www.pan-tex.net/usr/p/pampa-hist/dis.htm - accessed December 29,
2010.

[^21]: Mason County -- Alice J. Rhoades, \"Mason County,\" Handbook of Texas Online (http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcm04), accessed December 29, 2010.

[^22]: Oil and Texas: A Cultural History by Mary G. Ramos and first
published in the 2000-2001 edition of the *Texas Almanac*.
http://www.texasalmanac.com/history/highlights/oil/ - accessed December
29, 2010.

[^23]: Desdemona, Texas - Texas Escapes Online Magazine: Travel and History http://www.texasescapes.com/TexasGhostTowns/Desdemona-Texas.htm -
accessed December 29, 2010

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Herbert Hoover, later elected President, first became involved in
organizing the return of thousands of Americans caught at the outset of
World War I in August 1914. For the next two years he organized
distribution of over two million tons of food to nine million war
victims. Consequently, he was appointed head of the U.S. Food
Administration by President Woodrow Wilson after the U.S. entered the
war in 1917. As a member of the Supreme Economic Council at the war's
close, he organized shipments of food for millions of starving Germans
but became frustrated with England's continued blockade preventing food
from reaching those who were starving. Not for another eight months
could his supplies reach into Germany. -- Herbert Hoover: Humanitarian
-\
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herbert_Hoover\#Humanitarian -- accessed
July 27, 2011.

[^26]: J.B. will claim that he alone from among all with whom he attended
school in Volkertshausen survived.

[^27]: J.B. recorded receiving $100.00 for a trip to Cuba in December 1919
as part of an annual accounting summary, not the $125.00 reported here.
The following January's entries indicate that he sold $2,100.00 in
leases. It remains a mystery that he chose to mention his possible
travel to Cuba and to say nothing of his oil speculating. -- see J.B.'s
DL Ledger entries for 1920. -- DL Ledger in possession of M. Wieser.

[^28]: Lieselotte Ehrensperger, the daughter of Anna, clearly confirmed that
her grandmother was unable to work after being forced from
Volkertshausen. It was her mother who found work and made it possible
for Ernst to complete his schooling. She also confirmed that Ernst never
was asked to contribute to household expenses even after beginning work
at Aseuplar. Moneys earned by him he spent on being with his friends. --
Interview with Lieselotte Haug Ehrensperger in Tuttlingen, October 2009.

[^29]: The Interwar Years (1919-1938) Economics During the Inter-War Years
(1919-1938) -\
http://www.sparknotes.com/history/european/interwaryears/section1.html -
accessed September 16, 2008. Hereafter referenced as The Interwar Years.

[^30]: Maria would retreat to her room where she spent hours crying.

[^31]: The Interwar Years.

[^32]: History of Weimar Republic -
http://www.germannotes.com/hist_weimar_republic.shtml - accessed
September 16, 2008. Hereafter referenced as History of Weimar Republic.

[^33]: Ibid.

[^34]: Turmoil Establishment of the Weimar Republic -
http://www.zum.de/whkmla/region/germany/turmestgov.html - accessed
September 16, 2008. Hereafter referenced as Turmoil Establishment.

[^35]: History of Weimar Republic.

[^36]: Turmoil Establishment.

[^37]: History of Weimar Republic.

[^38]: Turmoil Establishment of the Weimar Republic.

[^39]: The government was located in the city of Weimar simply because
Berlin was in the hands of an opposition government.

[^40]: History of
Weimar Republic.

[^41]: Turmoil Establishment of the Weimar Republic.

[^42]: History of Weimar Republic.

[^43]: Alsace Lorraine had to be ceded to France; other parts were ceded to
Belgium and much of Posen and Westpreussen to Poland. Further
territories were to be separated from Germany, their political future
decided by public plebiscites. The city of Danzig was to become a free
city. The Rhineland, while remaining an integral part of Germany, was to
be demilitarized. - Turmoil Establishment of the Weimar Republic.

[^44]: Turmoil Establishment of the Weimar Republic.

[^45]: Ibid.

[^46]: Herbert Hoover, America's representative appointed to organize
delivery of supplies was forced to hold tons of supplies and food
intended to ward off starvation by Germans; but offshore for months, it
was prevented from entering German ports by the continuation of the
British blockade.

[^47]: The Interwar Years.

[^48]: Ibid.

[^49]: Ibid.

[^50]: Turmoil Establishment of the Weimar Republic.

[^51]: History of Weimar Republic.

[^52]: Ibid.

[^53]: The Interwar Years.

[^54]: Germany would make its last World War I preparation payment to France
in 2010.

[^55]: In 1902, the United States handed over control to a Cuban government after four years of occupation and helping its liberation from Spain. A new president was elected in 1902, and Cuba was declared independent, although Guantanamo Bay was leased to the United States. In World War I, Cuba declared war on Imperial Germany on April 7th, 1917, the day after the US entered the war.

Despite being unable to send troops to fight in Europe, Cuba played a
significant role as a base to protect the West Indies from U-Boat
attacks. Land that was in ruins following the Spanish-American War was
acquired by U.S. investors, enabling the United States to control
roughly three-quarters of the Cuban sugar production, the foundation of
the Cuban economy. American trade dominated Cuba during the first half
of the 20th century, aided by US government policy measures, assuring
influence over the island. ''The cities of Havana and Varadero, cities
that J.B. would visit, became tourist resorts, adorned with casinos and
strip-clubs. - History of Cuba, Cuba in the early 20th century -\
http://www.nationmaster.com/encyclopedia/History-of-Cuba\#Cuba_in_the_early_20th_century
-- accessed September 17, 2008.

[^56]: J.B. would often say that each of
Vincent's children inherited one million in cash and one or two of the
other enterprises owned by him. All, he claimed, managed to lose
everything.

[^57]: By July 1919, remarkable about the same time that J. F. Wieser & Co. contacted J.B., the price of wheat had fallen to new lows.
American farmers were facing financial ruin if the government did not
step in. President Wilson bowed to pressure and placed all American
wheat under governmental control. A wheat license was now required for
any company wishing to export wheat or flour. A "Wheat Director," a
Czar, was named with sole authority to regulate the export and import of
wheat and wheat flour, the domestic and foreign distribution, the
milling processes and the baking of bread and other products. The price
of wheat was set at $2.30 a bushel, and export to many countries was
made illegal; among them, Cuba. The J. F. Wieser & Co. now had new
regulations with which to contend. -- *Wheat put under License by Wilson
by Proclamation, The New York Times, July 17, 1919.*

[^58]: The License Number appears stamped beneath the company letterhead on
a letter written on November 22, 1919. The measures taken by the
president in July were not a surprise for as early as the end of January
1919; it had become clear that some kind of governmental action might be
taken. President Wilson had earlier been granted authority to set the
price of wheat at $2.26 and permitted the government to buy and sell
wheat both in the United States and abroad. -- *Special to the New York
Times.* February 09, 1919, Page 10,
http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F1081FFE3A5D147A93CBA91789D85F4D8185F9
-- accessed November 28, 2010.

[^59]: Estella kept her "love letters" loosely tied with crochet thread on
the top drawer of her Lane cedar chest that stood in her bedroom. Then,
one day, just like Joseph's mother, she burned them. All that survived
are a few short letters and postcards sent to her from places to which
J.B. traveled. I held them in my hand many times as a child in the late
40s and early 50s, but out of respect to her privacy never read a single
one of them. I was more interested in the stamps.

[^60]: Maria, J.B.'s mother, began managing the Gästehaus zum Löwen in 1909
for Wendelin because Wendelin, much like Lena's husband, Otto, lifted
not a finger to help run the boardinghouse. J.B. could not have failed
to notice how Estella kept house and helped her mother.

[^61]: J.B.'s determination in securing an education and Estella's longing
for one will play a significant role in their determination to make
whatever sacrifices were necessary in order for their children to
receive a college education.

[^62]: Louise was the oldest of Lena's children. William (Bill) and Benjamin
both "ran away" from their mother's home seeking work elsewhere; Bill at
the age of 12, Conrad, Estella's younger brother was still at home at
this time, and the four new children fathered by Otto were still too
young to help run the boardinghouse.

[^63]: Estella's knowledge of running a boarding house and understanding all the work that went into running one; cooking meals on time, cleaning,
dusting, the laundry, etc. caused her to adamantly oppose J.B.'s
thoughts of buying the Ostrow Hotel or later, opening a motel on the
small farm he purchased on the old Comfort road, and still later when he
suggested they open one on land he was wanting to buy in Missouri in the
1950s.

[^64]:**Penny postcards** were the rage at the turn of the 20th century and
friends send hundreds to each other, if only from across town. Many of
Estella's postcards are in the collection of Mark Wieser.

[^65]: Brewster County, of which Marathon is the county seat, lies in far
West Texas. A gentleman living in Hamilton sold J.B. 40 acres for
$80.00. Two dollars per acre may sound cheap, but that was a good price
for land at that time in West Texas. What mattered more was that for
$40 J.B became a land owner! Already he had experienced part of the
American Dream. It is uncertain in what year he attempted to travel out
west to take a look at his land, but it nearly cost him his life. In
another of his after-dinner tales, he told of traveling all day and well
into one night over unpaved and often unmarked roads before he and his
companion decided to stop for the night. After all, it was quite dark
and despite the open clear night, the stars failed to help much in
lightening the road ahead. They stopped and pulled out their cots for
the night. Only as chilly desert air at dawn awaked them did they
realize that before them, not another 50 yards, lay what appeared to
them as a bottomless canyon. Had they continued, they surely would have
driven into its dark abyss. Apparently J.B. felt good about his
investment. He continued to meticulously pay the property taxes on it
promptly every January until he sold it in 1926 for $1,000.00,
returning a profit of $920.00. As it turned out, he had done quite well
on his first investment in America. -- J.B.'s D.E. Ledger 1919-1920 in
possessions of M. Wieser.

[^66]: Letter and envelope in possession of M. Wieser, Vol. I, Letters
1910-1930.

[^67]: J.B. left Fredericksburg aboard the San Antonio, Fredericksburg and Great Northern Railway, the short line that was now barely in its
seventh year of operation and ran only as far as Comfort, Texas. There,
through passengers continued on the San Antonio and Pacific Railroad,
taking them to San Antonio to catch connections on the Southern Pacific.
From Fort Worth, J.B. continued on to Alabama and Mississippi and into
the western panhandle of the state of Florida. Then, reaching Florida,
he traveled south to Key West on the newly build rail-causeway that
linked Key West to the rest of Florida with a series of bridges. It had
to be a spectacular journey for J.B. Once there, he planned to catch a
steamer to Havana, hence the need to make his connection. Theodore is
about 35 miles east of Pascagoula, Mississippi, most likely in the
middle of nowhere. The delay, while the train was being put back on the
track, gave him time to write a letter to his "Dear Little Girl." The
postcard was posted on his way.

[^68]: Miami - Key West - Florida East Coast's 'railway that went to sea', 1908-1935 by Geoffrey Blyth -\
http://www.avoe05.dsl.pipex.com/us_key_w.htm - accessed September 18,
1.    Hereafter referenced as Miami -- Key West.

[^69]: Distance between Havana and Key West -
http://wiki.answers.com/Q/Distance_between_Havana_and_Key_West -
accessed September 18, 2008.

[^70]: Miami -- Key West.

[^71]: Ibid.

[^72]: An alternate route would have been to take a steamer from Galveston.

[^73]: Many Lost at Sea: *[Sun-Sentinel]{.ul}* - 1919 - Key West -
http://www.sun-sentinel.com/news/local/southflorida/sfl-1919hurricane,0,6580394.story
-- accessed September 18, 2008.

[^74]: Ibid.

[^75]: J.B. often was not very far removed from history-making events. At
about the time that Joseph was arriving in Key West, the West Indies
Airways had begun an exploitation of a route between Key West in Florida
and La Havana in Cuba by air on November 1, just the week prior to his
arrival there. Had Joseph been adventurous he could have been among
those who made that first historic trip by air. Unfortunately, J. F.
Wieser & Co. was not adventuresome. - 919 in Aviation -
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1919_in_aviation - accessed September 18,
2008.

[^76]:**Our Baker** was one of the brands marketed by J. F. Wieser & Co. --
copy from a letterhead in the possession of M. Wieser.

[^77]:**H. H. Sagebiel** was a Fredericksburg attorney at this time. His
daughter eventually became the town's first female attorney and his son
county judge. J.B. often told a tale of a gentleman who had come to town
asking around for a Mr. "Sage Pile," an obvious mispronunciation of
"Sagebiel," (Zag-a-beel). J.B. practically was reduced to rolling on the
ground he thought that to be so funny.

Estella worked for him briefly as a secretary before being hired by
Collins Company. H. H. Sagebiel was also involved in handling financial
matters for Texas Lutheran College in Seguin from which, J.B. claimed
that he had embezzled funds. Facing indictment, he asked J.B. to help
alter some documents that if changed would extricate him from being
indicted. J.B. refused and consequently, H. H. shot himself rather than
face embarrassment and imprisonment. -- Estella Wieser, ca. 1950s.

[^78]:**Treadwell** was a local dentist in Fredericksburg whom J.B. had
befriended.

[^79]: This souvenir postcard packet is in the possession of M. Wieser,
Fredericksburg, Texas, who also visited all of these places in September
2011 following an American-sponsored trade mission to The Republic of
Trinidad and Tobago. The Brooklyn Hotel was found in complete ruins.
Today it would have stood about five blocks from the capitol building
for Cuba and not far from the harbor.

[^80]: **Matanzas** is the capital of the Cuban province of Matanzas. It is
famed for its Afro-Cuban folklore. It is located on the northern shore
of the island of Cuba, on the Bay of Matanzas, 56 miles east of the
capital Havana. Matanzas is called *the city of bridges*, of which there
are seventeen crossing the three rivers that traverse the city. For this
reason it was referred to as the \"Venice of Cuba.\" It was also called
*\"La Atenas de Cuba\"* (the Athens of Cuba) for its poets. - Matanzas -
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matanzas - accessed September 18, 2008.


[^81]: Estella may have been recovering from an acute attack of appendicitis
at this time although I always thought that her operation had taken
place in June. She occasionally mentioned the anniversary date because
at that time having such an emergency operations was considered quite
dangerous.

[^82]: It is not certain what kind of suit J.B. was referring to here. It
was most likely a Patent Suit by Beal, but the hot tropical climate
probably dictated a linen suit. Linen is a difficult fabric with which
to work and make a suit. It creases easily, leading to J.B. having a
wrinkled and crumpled look and very likely he did not make a good
presentation wearing it. Linen is just not a traditional material for a
suit, but he had to get out of his woolen clothing lest he literally
burn up in the Cuban climate. Despite all its drawbacks, linen is a
wonderful choice for a light breathable suit, and that was very likely
the suit J.B. was describing here. -- Classic Mens Linen Suits: Unique
and Versatile Modern Look -
http://www.1920s-fashion-and-music.com/mens-linen-suits.html - accessed
July 27, 2011.

[^83]: **Henry Joseph** was always referred to by J.B. by his
last name, Joseph. Joseph was supposedly a friend with whom he became
very close. He was obviously a hunting buddy, and they were about the
same age. He was one of the few with whom he became friends after
arriving in Fredericksburg and remained friends for about two decades.
In the 1930s J.B. sold Joseph an acre of a three-acre lot that he had
purchased along the western shore of the new Lake Buchanan, and for many
years they enjoyed their lake camps side by side. J.B. had sold Henry
Joseph a portion on the south side and sold the northern side to Max
Beckmann, keeping the middle acre for himself, actually the less
desirable acreage. Joseph eventually became a banker and founder of the
new Fredericksburg National Bank during the depression. One day, in the
late 1930s, as J.B. was making a deposit at the bank, Joseph came out
from his office and accosted him regarding a decision J.B. had made when
serving as county judge. The argument became louder and heated as it
intensified. More by-standers began to listen in. Then Joseph accused
J.B. of being dishonest and J.B. fully exploded! Business in the bank
came to a halt as he fired back at his long-time acquaintance and friend
for questioning his honesty. No one did that! That was a supreme insult,
for honesty was one quality on which he prided himself. He withdrew all
his money and closed all his accounts there and for the rest of his life
never spoke to Henry Joseph again. Neither apologized. J.B. was the
loser of this confrontation in the long run. J.B. sold his middle lot
after the Second World War and never returned to the shores of Lake
Buchanan again save for one or two Labor Day picnics in the 1950s.

[^84]: J.B. began keeping a D E Ledger at the beginning of 1919 and in a
recap of incomes and expenses noted that he grossed $145.00 in abstract
work, earned $74.40 in collection, and $45.00 for law work, $362.05,
he was paid only $100.00 for his trip to Cuba, not the $125.00 he
claimed in an earlier letter, and earned $298.75 in commissions on
Blanco County oil leases and $362.05 on other sundry items. He lost
$28.00 on San Antonio, Fredericksburg, and Northern Railroad stocks,
paid $60.00 in office rent for the year, and paid $10.50 in taxes,
$36.40 in stamps and stationary, $50.00 for office help, $35.00 for
furniture, and $12.10 for wood. He netted $474.45 for the year. These
numbers appear to have been adjusted for reporting the new Federal
Income Tax Report. An examination of each account clearly presents a
more detailed accounting of his finances. - D E Ledger, page 165 -- in
the private collection of M. Wieser.

